
                        GEOFFREY WINS HIS CASE

Before ten o'clock on the following morning, having already spent two
hours over his brief, that he had now thoroughly mastered, Geoffrey
was at his chambers, which he had some difficulty in reaching owing to
the thick fog that still hung over London, and indeed all England.

To his surprise nothing had been heard either of the Attorney-General
or of Mr. Candleton. The solicitors were in despair; but he consoled
them by saying that one or the other was sure to turn up in time, and
that a few words would suffice to explain the additional light which
had been thrown on the case. He occupied his half hour, however, in
making a few rough notes to guide him in the altogether improbable
event of his being called on to open, and then went into court. The
case was first on the list, and there were a good many counsel engaged
on the other side. Just as the judge took his seat, the solicitor,
with an expression of dismay, handed Geoffrey a telegram which had
that moment arrived from Mr. Candleton. It was dated from Calais on
the previous night, and ran, "Am unable to cross on account of thick
fog. You had better get somebody else in Parsons and Douse."

"And we haven't got another brief prepared," said the agonised
solicitor. ""What is more, I can hear nothing of the Attorney-General,
and his clerk does not seem to know where he is. You must ask for an
adjournment, Mr. Bingham; you can't manage the case alone."

"Very well," said Geoffrey, and on the case being called he rose and
stated the circumstances to the court. But the Court was crusty. It
had got the fog down its throat, and altogether It didn't seem to see
it. Moreover the other side, marking its advantage, objected strongly.
The witnesses, brought at great expense, were there; his Lordship was
there, the jury was there; if this case was not taken there was no
other with which they could go on, &c., &c.

The court took the same view, and lectured Geoffrey severely. Every
counsel in a case, the Court remembered, when It was at the Bar, used
to be able to open that case at a moment's notice, and though things
had, It implied, no doubt deteriorated to a considerable extent since
those palmy days, every counsel ought still to be prepared to do so on
emergency.

Of course, however, if he, Geoffrey, told the court that he was
absolutely unprepared to go on with the case, It would have no option
but to grant an adjournment.

"I am perfectly prepared to go on with it, my lord," Geoffrey
interposed calmly.

"Very well," said the Court in a mollified tone, "then go on! I have
no doubt that the learned Attorney-General will arrive presently."

Then, as is not unusual in a probate suit, followed an argument as to
who should open it, the plaintiff or the defendant. Geoffrey claimed
that this right clearly lay with him, and the opposing counsel raised
no great objection, thinking that they would do well to leave the
opening in the hands of a rather inexperienced man, who would very
likely work his side more harm than good. So, somewhat to the horror
of the solicitors, who thought with longing of the eloquence of the
Attorney-General, and the unrivalled experience and finesse of Mr.
Candleton, Geoffrey was called upon to open the case for the
defendants, propounding the first will.

He rose without fear or hesitation, and with but one prayer in his
heart, that no untimely Attorney-General would put in an appearance.
He had got his chance, the chance for which many able men have to wait
long years, and he knew it, and meant to make the most of it.
Naturally a brilliant speaker, Geoffrey was not, as so many good
speakers are, subject to fits of nervousness, and he was, moreover,
thoroughly master of his case. In five minutes judge, jury and counsel
were all listening to him with attention; in ten they were absorbed in
the lucid and succinct statement of the facts which he was unfolding
to them. His ghost theory was at first received with a smile, but
presently counsel on the other side ceased to smile, and began to look
uneasy. If he could prove what he said, there was an end of their
case. When he had been speaking for about forty minutes one of the
opposing counsel interrupted him with some remark, and at that moment
he noticed that the Attorney-General's clerk was talking to the
solicitor beneath him.

"Bother it, he is coming," thought Geoffrey.

But no, the solicitor bending forward informed him that the Attorney-
General had been unavoidably detained by some important Government
matter, and had returned his brief.

"Well, we must get on as we can," Geoffrey said.

"If you continue like that we shall get on very well," whispered the
solicitors, and then Geoffrey knew that he was doing well.

"Yes, Mr. Bingham!" said his Lordship.

Then Geoffrey went on with his statement.

At lunch time it was a question whether another leader should be
briefed. Geoffrey said that so far as he was concerned he could get on
alone. He knew every point of the case, and he had got a friend to
"take a note" for him while he was speaking.

After some hesitation the solicitors decided not to brief fresh
counsel at this stage of the case, but to leave it entirely in his
hands.

It would be useless to follow the details of this remarkable will
suit, which lasted two days, and attracted much attention. Geoffrey
won it and won it triumphantly. His address to the jury on the whole
case was long remembered in the courts, rising as it did to a very
high level of forensic eloquence. Few who saw it ever forgot the sight
of his handsome face and commanding presence as he crushed the case of
his opponents like an eggshell, and then with calm and overwhelming
force denounced the woman who with her lover had concocted the cruel
plot that robbed her uncle of life and her cousins of their property,
till at the last, pointing towards her with outstretched hand, he
branded her to the jury as a murderess.

Few in that crowded court have forgotten the tragic scene that
followed, when the trembling woman, worn out by the long anxiety of
the trial, and utterly unnerved by her accuser's brilliant invective,
rose from her seat and cried:

"We did it--it is true that we did it to get the money, but we did not
mean to frighten him to death," and then fell fainting to the ground--
or Geoffrey Bingham's quiet words as he sat down:

"My lord and gentlemen of the jury, I do not think it necessary to
carry my case any further."

There was no applause, the occasion was too dramatically solemn, but
the impression made both upon the court and the outside public, to
whom such a scene is peculiarly fitted to appeal, was deep and
lasting.

Geoffrey himself was under little delusion about the matter. He had no
conceit in his composition, but neither had he any false modesty. He
merely accepted the situation as really powerful men do accept such
events--with thankfulness, but without surprise. He had got his chance
at last, and like any other able man, whatever his walk of life, he
had risen to it. That was all. Most men get such chances in some shape
or form, and are unable to avail themselves of them. Geoffrey was one
of the exceptions; as Beatrice had said, he was born to succeed. As he
sat down, he knew that he was a made man.

And yet while he walked home that night, his ears still full of the
congratulations which had rained in on him from every quarter, he was
conscious of a certain pride. He will have felt as Geoffrey felt that
night, whose lot it has been to fight long and strenuously against
circumstances so adverse as to be almost overwhelming, knowing in his
heart that he was born to lead and not to follow; and who at last, by
one mental effort, with no friendly hand to help, and no friendly
voice to guide, has succeeded in bursting a road through the
difficulties which hemmed him in, and has suddenly found himself, not
above competition indeed, but still able to meet it. He will not have
been too proud of that endeavour; it will have seemed but a little
thing to him--a thing full of faults and imperfections, and falling
far short of his ideal. He will not even have attached a great
importance to his success, because, if he is a person of this calibre,
he must remember how small it is, when all is said and done; that even
in his day there are those who can beat him on his own ground; and
also that all worldly success, like the most perfect flower, yet bears
in it the elements of decay. But he will have reflected with humble
satisfaction on those long years of patient striving which have at
length lifted him to an eminence whence he can climb on and on,
scarcely encumbered by the jostling crowd; till at length, worn out,
the time comes for him to fall.

So Geoffrey thought and felt. The thing was to be done, and he had
done it. Honoria should have money now; she should no longer be able
to twit him with their poverty. Yes, and a better thought still,
Beatrice would be glad to hear of his little triumph.

He reached home rather late. Honoria was going out to dinner with a
distinguished cousin, and was already dressing. Geoffrey had declined
the invitation, which was a short one, because he had not expected to
be back from chambers. In this enthusiasm, however, he went to his
wife's room to tell her of the event.

"Well," she said, "what have you been doing? I think that you might
have arranged to come out with me. My going out so much by myself does
not look well. Oh, I forgot; of course you are in that case."

"Yes--that is, I was. I have won the case. Here is a very fair report
of it in the /St. James's Gazette/ if you care to read it."

"Good heavens, Geoffrey! How can you expect me to read all that stuff
when I am dressing?"

"I don't expect you to, Honoria; only, as I say, I have won the case,
and I shall get plenty of work now."

"Will you? I am glad to hear it; perhaps we shall be able to escape
from this horrid flat if you do. There, Anne! Je vous l'ai toujours
dit, cette robe ne me va pas bien."

"Mais, milady, la robe va parfaitement----"

"That is your opinion," grumbled Lady Honoria. "Well, it isn't mine.
But it will have to do. Good-night, Geoffrey; I daresay that you will
have gone to bed when I get back," and she was gone.

Geoffrey picked up his /St. James's Gazette/ with a sigh. He felt
hurt, and knew that he was a fool for his pains. Lady Honoria was not
a sympathetic person; it was not fair to expect it from her. Still he
felt hurt. He went upstairs and heard Effie her prayers.

"Where has you beed, daddy?--to the Smoky Town?" The Temple was
euphemistically known to Effie as the Smoky Town.

"Yes, dear."

"You go to the Smoky Town to make bread and butter, don't you, daddy?"

"Yes, dear, to make bread and butter."

"And did you make any, daddy?"

"Yes, Effie, a good deal to-day."

"Then where is it? In your pocket?"

"No, love, not exactly. I won a big lawsuit to-day, and I shall get a
great many pennies for it."

"Oh," answered Effie meditatively, "I am glad that you did win. You do
like to win, doesn't you, daddy, dear."

"Yes, love."

"Then I will give you a kiss, daddy, because you did win," and she
suited the action to the word.

Geoffrey went from the little room with a softened heart. He dressed
and ate some dinner.

Then he sat down and wrote a long letter to Beatrice, telling her all
about the trial, and not sparing her his reasons for adopting each
particular tactic and line of argument which conduced to the great
result.

And though his letter was four sheets in length, he knew that Beatrice
would not be bored at having to read it.



                            CHAPTER XVIII

                           THE RISING STAR

As might be expected, the memorable case of Parsons and Douse proved
to be the turning point in Geoffrey's career, which was thenceforward
one of brilliant and startling success. On the very next morning when
he reached his chambers it was to find three heavy briefs awaiting
him, and they proved to be but the heralds of an uninterrupted flow of
lucrative business. Of course, he was not a Queen's Counsel, but now
that his great natural powers of advocacy had become generally known,
solicitors frequently employed him alone, or gave him another junior,
so that he might bring those powers to bear upon juries. Now it was,
too, that Geoffrey reaped the fruits of the arduous legal studies
which he had followed without cessation from the time when he found
himself thrown upon his own resources, and which had made a sound
lawyer of him as well as a brilliant and effective advocate. Soon,
even with his great capacity for work, he had as much business as he
could attend to. When fortune gives good gifts, she generally does so
with a lavish hand.

Thus it came to pass that, about three weeks after the trial of
Parsons and Douse, Geoffrey's uncle the solicitor died, and to his
surprise left him twenty thousand pounds, "believing," he said in his
will, which was dated three days before the testator's death, "that
this sum will assist him to rise to the head of his profession."

Now that it had dawned upon her that her husband really was a success,
Honoria's manner towards him modified very considerably. She even
became amiable, and once or twice almost affectionate. When Geoffrey
told her of the twenty thousand pounds she was radiant.

"Why, we shall be able to go back to Bolton Street now," she said,
"and as luck will have it, our old house is to let. I saw a bill in
the window yesterday."

"Yes," he said, "you can go back as soon as you like."

"And can we keep a carriage?"

"No, not yet; I am doing well, but not well enough for that. Next
year, if I live, you will be able to have a carriage. Don't begin to
grumble, Honoria. I have got £150 to spare, and if you care to come
round to a jeweller's you can spend it on what you like."

"Oh, you delightful person!" said his wife.

So they went to the jeweller's, and Lady Honoria bought ornaments to
the value of £150, and carried them home and hung over them, as
another class of woman might hang over her first-born child, admiring
them with a tender ecstasy. Whenever he had a sum of money that he
could afford to part with, Geoffrey would take her thus to a
jeweller's or a dressmaker's, and stand by coldly while she bought
things to its value. Lady Honoria was delighted. It never entered into
her mind that in a sense he was taking a revenge upon her, and that
every fresh exhibition of her rejoicings over the good things thus
provided added to his contempt for her.

Those were happy days for Lady Honoria! She rejoiced in this return of
wealth like a school-boy at the coming of the holidays, or a half-
frozen wanderer at the rising of the sun. She had been miserable
during all this night of poverty, as miserable as her nature admitted
of, now she was happy again, as she understood happiness. For bred,
educated, civilized--what you will--out of the more human passions,
Lady Honoria had replaced them by this idol-worship of wealth, or
rather of what wealth brings. It gave her a positive physical
satisfaction; her beauty, which had begun to fade, came back to her;
she looked five years younger. And all the while Geoffrey watched her
with an ever-growing scorn.

Once it broke out. The Bolton Street house had been furnished; he gave
her fifteen hundred pounds to do it, and with what things they owned
she managed very well on that. They moved into it, and Honoria had set
herself up with a sufficient supply of grand dresses and jewellery,
suitable to her recovered position. One day however, it occurred to
her that Effie was a child of remarkable beauty, who, if properly
dressed, would look very nice in the drawing-room at tea-time. So she
ordered a lovely costume for her--this deponent is not able to
describe it, but it consisted largely of velvet and lace. Geoffrey
heard nothing of this dress, but coming home rather early one
afternoon--it was on a Saturday, he found the child being shown off to
a room full of visitors, and dressed in a strange and wonderful attire
with which, not unnaturally, she was vastly pleased. He said nothing
at the time, but when at length the dropping fire of callers had
ceased, he asked who put Effie into that dress.

"I did," said Lady Honoria, "and a pretty penny it has cost, I can
tell you. But I can't have the child come down so poorly clothed, it
does not look well."

"Then she can stay upstairs," said Geoffrey frowning.

"What do you mean?" asked his wife.

"I mean that I will not have her decked out in those fine clothes.
They are quite unsuitable to her age. There is plenty of time for her
to take to vanity."

"I really don't understand you, Geoffrey. Why should not the child be
handsomely dressed?"

"Why not! Great heaven, Honoria, do you suppose that I want to see
Effie grow up like you, to lead a life of empty pleasure-seeking
idleness, and make a god of luxury. I had rather see her"--he was
going to add, "dead first," but checked himself and said--"have to
work for her living. Dress yourself up as much as you like, but leave
the child alone."

Lady Honoria was furious, but she was also a little frightened. She
had never heard her husband speak quite like this before, and there
was something underneath his words that she did not quite understand.
Still less did she understand when on the Monday Geoffrey suddenly
told her that he had fifty pounds for her to spend as she liked; then
accompanied her to a mantle shop, and stood patiently by, smiling
coldly while she invested it in lace and embroideries. Honoria thought
that he was making reparation for his sharp words, and so he was, but
to himself, and in another sense. Every time he gave her money in this
fashion, Geoffrey felt like a man who has paid off a debt of honour.
She had taunted him again and again with her poverty--the poverty she
said that he had brought her; for every taunt he would heap upon her
all those things in which her soul delighted. He would glut her with
wealth as, in her hour of victory, Queen Tomyris glutted dead Cyrus
with the blood of men.

It was an odd way of taking a revenge, and one that suited Lady
Honoria admirably; but though its victim felt no sting, it gave
Geoffrey much secret relief. Also he was curious; he wished to see if
there was any bottom to such a woman's desire for luxury, if it would
not bring satiety with it. But Lady Honoria was a very bad subject for
such an experiment. She never showed the least sign of being satiated,
either with fine things, with pleasures, or with social delights. They
were her natural element, and he might as soon have expected a fish to
weary of the water, or an eagle of the rushing air.



The winter wore away and the spring came. One day, it was in April,
Geoffrey, who was a moderate Liberal by persuasion, casually announced
at dinner that he was going to stand for Parliament in the Unionist
interest. The representation of one of the few Metropolitan divisions
which had then returned a Home Ruler had fallen vacant. As it chanced
he knew the head Unionist whip very well. They had been friends since
they were lads at school together, and this gentleman, having heard
Geoffrey make a brilliant speech in court, was suddenly struck with
the idea that he was the very man to lead a forlorn hope.

The upshot of it was that Geoffrey was asked if he would stand, and
replied that he must have two days to think it over. What he really
wanted the two days for was to enable him to write to Beatrice and
receive an answer from her. He had an almost superstitious faith in
her judgment, and did not like to act without it. After carefully
weighing the pros and cons, his own view was that he should do well to
stand. Probably he would be defeated, and it might cost him five
hundred pounds. On the other hand it would certainly make his name
known as a politician, and he was now in a fair way to earn so large
an income that he could well afford to risk the money. The only great
objection which he saw, was that if he happened to get in, it must
mean that he would have to work all day and all night too. Well, he
was strong and the more work he did the better--it kept him from
thinking.

In due course Beatrice's answer came. Her view coincided with his own;
she recommended him to take the opportunity, and pointed out that with
his growing legal reputation there was no office in the State to which
he might not aspire, when he had once proved himself a capable member
of Parliament. Geoffrey read the letter through; then immediately sat
down and wrote to his friend the whip, accepting the suggestion of the
Government.

The next fortnight was a hard one for him, but Geoffrey was as good a
man on the platform as in court, and he had, moreover, the very
valuable knack of suiting himself to his audience. As his canvass went
on it was generally recognised that the seat which had been considered
hopeless was now doubtful. A great amount of public interest was
concentrated on the election, both upon the Unionist and the
Separatist side, each claiming that the result of the poll would show
to their advantage. The Home Rule party strained every nerve against
him, being most anxious to show that the free and independent electors
of this single division, and therefore of the country at large, held
the Government policy in particular horror. Letters were obtained from
great authorities and freely printed. Irish members, fresh from gaol,
were brought down to detail their grievances. It was even suggested
that one of them should appear on the platform in prison garb--in
short, every electioneering engine known to political science was
brought to bear to forward the fortunes of either side.

As time went on Lady Honoria, who had been somewhat indifferent at
first, grew quite excited about the result. For one thing she found
that the contest attached an importance to herself in the eyes of the
truly great, which was not without its charm. On the day of the poll
she drove about all day in an open carriage under a bright blue
parasol, having Effie (who had become very bored) by her side, and two
noble lords on the front seat. As a consequence the result was
universally declared by a certain section of the press to be entirely
due to the efforts of an unprincipled but titled and lovely woman. It
was even said that, like another lady of rank in a past generation,
she kissed a butcher in order to win his vote. But those who made the
remark did not know Lady Honoria; she was incapable of kissing a
butcher, or indeed anybody else. Her inclinations did not lie in that
direction.

In the end Geoffrey was returned by a magnificent majority of ten
votes, reduced on a scrutiny to seven. He took his seat in the House
on the following night amidst loud Unionist cheering. In the course of
the evening's debate a prominent member of the Government made
allusion to his return as a proof of the triumph of Unionist
principles. Thereon a very leading member of the Separatist opposition
retorted that it was nothing of the sort, "that it was a matter of
common notoriety that the honourable member's return was owing to the
unusual and most uncommon ability displayed by him in the course of
his canvass, aided as it was, by artfully applied and aristocratic
feminine influence." This was a delicate allusion to Honoria and her
blue parasol.

As Geoffrey and his wife were driving back to Bolton Street, after the
declaration of the poll, a little incident occurred. Geoffrey told the
coachman to stop at the first telegraph office and, getting out of the
carriage, wired to Beatrice, "In by ten votes."

"Who have you been telegraphing to, Geoffrey?" asked Lady Honoria.

"I telegraphed to Miss Granger," he answered.

"Ah! So you still keep up a correspondence with that pupil teacher
girl."

"Yes, I do. I wish that I had a few more such correspondents."

"Indeed. You are easy to please. I thought her one of the most
disagreeable young women whom I ever met."

"Then it does not say much for your taste, Honoria."

His wife made no further remark, but she had her thoughts. Honoria
possessed good points: among others she was not a jealous person; she
was too cold and too indifferent to be jealous. But she did not like
the idea of another woman obtaining an influence over her husband,
who, as she now began to recognise, was one of the most brilliant men
of his day, and who might well become one of the most wealthy and
powerful. Clearly he existed for /her/ benefit, not for that of any
other woman. She was no fool, and she saw that a considerable intimacy
must exist between the two. Otherwise Geoffrey would not have thought
of telegraphing to Beatrice at such a moment.

Within a week of his election Geoffrey made a speech. It was not a
long speech, nor was it upon any very important issue; but it was
exceedingly good of its kind, good enough to be reported verbatim
indeed, and those listening to it recognised that they had to deal
with a new man who would one day be a very big man. There is no place
where an able person finds his level quicker than in the House of
Commons, composed as it is for the most part, of more or less wealthy
or frantic mediocrities. But Geoffrey was not a mediocrity, he was an
exceedingly able and powerful man, and this fact the House quickly
recognised.

For the next few months Geoffrey worked as men rarely work. All day he
was at his chambers or in court, and at night he sat in the House,
getting up his briefs when he could. But he always did get them up; no
solicitors had to complain that the interests of their client were
neglected by him; also he still found time to write to Beatrice. For
the rest he went out but little, and except in the way of business
associated with very few. Indeed he grew more and more silent and
reserved, till at last he won the reputation of being cold and hard.
Not that he was really so. He threw himself head and soul into his
work with a fixed determination to reach the top of the tree. He knew
that he should not care very much about it when he got there, but he
enjoyed the struggle.

Geoffrey was not a truly ambitious man; he was no mere self-seeker. He
knew the folly of ambition too well, and its end was always clearly
before his eyes. He often thought to himself that if he could have
chosen his lot, he would have asked for a cottage with a good garden,
five hundred a year, and somebody to care for. But perhaps he would
soon have wearied of his cottage. He worked to stifle thought, and to
some extent he succeeded. But he was at bottom an affectionate-natured
man, and he could not stifle the longing for sympathy which was his
secret weakness, though his pride would never allow him to show it.
What did he care for his triumphs when he had nobody with whom to
share them? All he could share were their fruits, and these he gave
away freely enough. It was but little that Geoffrey spent upon his own
gratification. A certain share of his gains he put by, the rest went
in expenses. The house in Bolton Street was a very gay place in those
days, but its master took but little part in its gaieties.

And what was the fact? The longer he remained separated from Beatrice
the more intensely did he long for her society. It was of no use; try
as he would, he could not put that sweet face from his mind; it drew
him as a magnet draws a needle. Success did not bring him happiness,
except in the sense that it relieved him from money cares.

People of coarse temperament only can find real satisfaction in
worldly triumphs, and eat, drink, and be merry, for to-morrow they
die! Men like Geoffrey soon learn that this also is vanity. On the
contrary, as his mind grew more and more wearied with the strain of
work, melancholy took an ever stronger hold of it. Had he gone to a
doctor, he might have been told that his liver was out of order, which
was very likely true. But this would not mend matters. "What a world,"
he might have cried, "what a world to live in when all the man's
happiness depends upon his liver!" He contracted an accursed habit of
looking on the black side of things; trouble always caught his eye.

It was no wonderful case. Men of large mind are very rarely happy men.
It is your little animal-minded individual who can be happy. Thus
women, who reflect less, are as a class much happier and more
contented than men. But the large-minded man sees too far, and guesses
too much of what he cannot see. He looks forward, and notes the dusty
end of his laborious days; he looks around and shudders at the
unceasing misery of a coarse struggling world; the sight of the
pitiful beggar babe craving bread on tottering feet, pierces his
heart. He cannot console himself with a reflection that the child had
no business to be born, or that if he denuded himself of his last
pound he would not materially help the class which bred it.

And above the garish lights of earthly joys and the dim reek of
earthly wretchedness, he sees the solemn firmament that veils his
race's destiny. For such a man, in such a mood, even religion has
terrors as well as hopes, and while the gloom gathers about his mind
these are with him more and more. What lies beyond that arching
mystery to whose horizon he daily draws more close--whose doors may
even now be opening for him? A hundred hands point out a hundred roads
to knowledge--they are lost half way. Only the cold spiritual
firmament, unlit by any guiding stars, unbrightened by the flood of
human day, and unshadowed by the veils of human night, still bends
above his head in awful changelessness, and still his weary feet draw
closer to the portals of the West.

It is very sad and wrong, but it is not altogether his fault; it is
rather a fault of the age, of over-education, of over-striving to be
wise. Cultivate the searching spirit and it will grow and rend you.
The spirit would soar, it would see, but the flesh weighs it down, and
in all flesh there is little light. Yet, at times, brooding on some
unnatural height of Thought, its eyes seem to be opened, and it
catches gleams of terrifying days to come, or perchance, discerns the
hopeless gates of an immeasurable night.

Oh, for that simpler faith which ever recedes farther from the ken of
the cultivated, questioning mind! There alone can peace be found, and
for the foolish who discard it, setting up man's wisdom at a sign,
soon the human lot will be one long fear. Grown scientific and weary
with the weight of knowledge, they will reject their ancient Gods, and
no smug-faced Positivism will bring them consolation. Science, here
and there illumining the gloom of destiny with its poor electric
lights, cries out that they are guiding stars. But they are no stars,
and they will flare away. Let us pray for darkness, more darkness,
lest, to our bewildered sight, they do but serve to show that which
shall murder Hope.



So think Geoffrey and his kin, and in their unexpressed dismay, turn,
seeking refuge from their physical and spiritual loneliness, but for
the most part finding none. Nature, still strong in them, points to
the dear fellowship of woman, and they make the venture to find a
mate, not a companion. But as it chanced in Geoffrey's case he did
find such a companion in Beatrice, after he had, by marriage, built up
an impassable wall between them.

And yet he longed for her society with an intensity that alarmed him.
He had her letters indeed, but what are letters! One touch of a
beloved hand is worth a thousand letters. In the midst of his great
success Geoffrey was wretched at heart, yet it seemed to him that if
he once more could have Beatrice at his side, though only as a friend,
he would find rest and happiness.



When a man's heart is thus set upon an object, his reason is soon
convinced of its innocence, even of its desirability, and a kindly
fate will generally contrive to give him the opportunity of ruin which
he so ardently desires.



                             CHAPTER XIX

                        GEOFFREY HAS A VISITOR

And Beatrice--had she fared better during these long months? Alas, not
at all. She had gone away from the Bryngelly Station on that autumn
morning of farewell sick at heart, and sick at heart she had remained.
Through all the long winter months sorrow and bitterness had been her
portion, and now in the happiness of spring, sorrow and bitterness
were with her still. She loved him, she longed for his presence, and
it was denied to her. She could not console herself as can some women,
nor did her deep passion wear away; on the contrary, it seemed to grow
and gather with every passing week. Neither did she wish to lose it,
she loved too well for that. It was better to be thus tormented by
conscience and by hopelessness than to lose her cause of pain.

One consolation Beatrice had and one only: she knew that Geoffrey did
not forget her. His letters told her this. These letters indeed were
everything to her--a woman can get so much more comfort out of a
letter than a man. Next to receiving them she loved to answer them.
She was a good and even a brilliant letter writer, but often and often
she would tear up what she had written and begin again. There was not
much news in Bryngelly; it was difficult to make her letters amusing.
Also the farcical nature of the whole proceeding seemed to paralyse
her. It was ridiculous, having so much to say, to be able to say
nothing. Not that Beatrice wished to indite love-letters--such an idea
had never crossed her mind, but rather to write as they had talked.
Yet when she tried to do so the results were not satisfactory to her,
the words looked strange on paper--she could not send them.

In Geoffrey's meteor-like advance to fame and fortune she took the
keenest joy and interest, far more than he did indeed. Though, like
that of most other intelligent creatures, her soul turned with
loathing from the dreary fustian of politics, she would religiously
search the parliamentary column from beginning to end on the chance of
finding his name or the notice of a speech by him. The law reports
also furnished her with a happy hunting-ground in which she often
found her game.

But they were miserable months. To rise in the morning, to go through
the round of daily duty--thinking of Geoffrey; to come home wearied,
and finally to seek refuge in sleep and dreams of him--this was the
sum of them. Then there were other troubles. To begin with, things had
gone from bad to worse at the Vicarage. The tithes scarcely came in at
all, and every day their poverty pinched them closer. Had it not been
for Beatrice's salary it was difficult to see how the family could
have continued to exist. She gave it almost all to her father now,
only keeping back a very small sum for her necessary clothing and such
sundries as stamps and writing paper. Even then, Elizabeth grumbled
bitterly at her extravagance in continuing to buy a daily paper,
asking what business she had to spend sixpence a week on such a
needless luxury. But Beatrice would not make up her mind to dock the
paper with its occasional mention of Geoffrey.

Again, Owen Davies was a perpetual anxiety to her. His infatuation for
herself was becoming notorious; everybody saw it except her father.
Mr. Granger's mind was so occupied with questions connected with tithe
that fortunately for Beatrice little else could find an entry. Owen
dogged her about; he would wait whole hours outside the school or by
the Vicarage gate merely to speak a few words to her. Sometimes when
at length she appeared he seemed to be struck dumb, he could say
nothing, but would gaze at her with his dull eyes in a fashion that
filled her with vague alarm. He never ventured to speak to her of his
love indeed, but he looked it, which was almost as bad. Another thing
was that he had grown jealous. The seed which Elizabeth had planted in
his mind had brought forth abundantly, though of course Beatrice did
not know that this was her sister's doing.

On the very morning that Geoffrey went away Mr. Davies had met her as
she was walking back from the station and asked her if Mr. Bingham had
gone. When she replied that this was so, she had distinctly heard him
murmur, "Thank God! thank God!" Subsequently she discovered also that
he bribed the old postman to keep count of the letters which she sent
and received from Geoffrey.

These things filled Beatrice with alarm, but there was worse behind.
Mr. Davies began to send her presents, first such things as prize
pigeons and fowls, then jewellery. The pigeons and fowls she could not
well return without exciting remark, but the jewellery she sent back
by one of the school children. First came a bracelet, then a locket
with his photograph inside, and lastly, a case that, when she opened
it, which her curiosity led her to do, nearly blinded her with light.
It was a diamond necklace, and she had never seen such diamonds
before, but from their size and lustre she knew that each stone must
be worth hundreds of pounds. Beatrice put it in her pocket and carried
it until she met him, which she did in the course of that afternoon.

"Mr. Davies," she said before he could speak, and handing him the
package, "this has been sent to me by mistake. Will you kindly take it
back?"

He took it, abashed.

"Mr. Davies," she went on, looking him full in the eyes, "I hope that
there will be no more such mistakes. Please understand that I cannot
accept presents from you."

"If Mr. Bingham had sent it, you would have accepted it," he muttered
sulkily.

Beatrice turned and flashed such a look on him that he fell back and
left her. But it was true, and she knew that it was true. If Geoffrey
had given her a sixpence with a hole in it, she would have valued it
more than all the diamonds on earth. Oh! what a position was hers. And
it was wrong, too. She had no right to love the husband of another
woman. But right or wrong the fact remained: she did love him.

And the worst of it was that, as she well knew, sooner or later all
this about Mr. Davies must come to the ears of her father, and then
what would happen? One thing was certain. In his present poverty-
stricken condition he would move heaven and earth to bring about her
marriage to this rich man. Her father never had been very scrupulous
where money was concerned, and the pinch of want was not likely to
make him more so.

Nor, we may be sure, did all this escape the jealous eye of Elizabeth.
Things looked black for her, but she did not intend to throw up the
cards on that account. Only it was time to lead trumps. In other
words, Beatrice must be fatally compromised in the eyes of Owen
Davies, if by any means this could be brought about. So far things had
gone well for her schemes. Beatrice and Geoffrey loved each other, of
that Elizabeth was certain. But the existence of this secret,
underhand affection would avail her naught unless it could be ripened
into acts. Everybody is free to indulge in secret predilections, but
if once they are given way to, if once a woman's character is
compromised, then the world avails itself of its opportunities and
destroys her. What man, thought Elizabeth, would marry a compromised
woman? If Beatrice could be compromised, Owen Davies would not take
her to wife--therefore this must be brought about.

It sounds wicked and unnatural. "Impossible that sister should so
treat sister," the reader of this history may say, thinking of her
own, and of her affectionate and respectable surroundings. But it is
not impossible. If you, who doubt, will study the law reports, and no
worse occupation can be wished to you, you will find that such things
are possible. Human nature can rise to strange heights, and it can
also fall to depths beyond your fathoming. Because a thing is without
parallel in your own small experience it in no way follows that it
cannot be.

Elizabeth was a very remorseless person; she was more--she was a woman
actuated by passion and by greed: the two strongest motives known to
the human heart. But with her recklessness she united a considerable
degree of intelligence, or rather of intellect. Had she been a savage
she might have removed her sister from her path by a more expeditious
way; being what she was, she merely strove to effect the same end by a
method not punishable by law, in short, by murdering her reputation.
Would she be responsible if her sister went wrong, and was thus
utterly discredited in the eyes of this man who wished to marry her,
and whom Elizabeth wished to marry? Of course not; that was Beatrice's
affair. But she could give her every chance of falling into
temptation, and this it was her fixed design to do.

Circumstances soon gave her an opportunity. The need of money became
very pressing at the Vicarage. They had literally no longer the
wherewithal to live. The tithe payers absolutely refused to fulfil
their obligations. As it happened, Jones, the man who had murdered the
auctioneer, was never brought to trial. He died shortly after his
arrest in a fit of /delirium tremens/ and nervous prostration brought
on by the sudden cessation of a supply of stimulants, and an example
was lost, that, had he been duly hanged, might have been made of the
results of defying the law. Mr. Granger was now too poor to institute
any further proceedings, which, in the state of public feeling in
Wales, might or might not succeed; he could only submit, and
submission meant beggary. Indeed he was already a beggar. In this
state of affairs he took counsel with Elizabeth, pointing out that
they must either get money or starve. Now the only possible way to get
money was by borrowing it, and Mr. Granger's suggestion was that he
should apply to Owen Davies, who had plenty. Indeed he would have done
so long ago, but that the squire had the reputation of being an
exceedingly close-fisted man.

But this proposition did not at all suit Elizabeth's book. Her great
object had been to conceal Mr. Davies's desires as regards Beatrice
from her father, and her daily dread was that he might become
acquainted with them from some outside source. She knew very well that
if her father went up to the Castle to borrow money it would be lent,
or rather given, freely enough; but she also knew that the lender
would almost certainly take the opportunity, the very favourable
opportunity, to unfold his wishes as regards the borrower's daughter.
The one thing would naturally lead to the other--the promise of her
father's support of Owen's suit would be the consideration for the
money received. How gladly that support would be given was also
obvious to her, and with her father pushing Beatrice on the one side
and Owen Davies pushing her on the other, how could Elizabeth be sure
that she would not yield? Beatrice would be the very person to be
carried away by an idea of duty. Their father would tell her that he
had got the money on this undertaking, and it was quite possible that
her pride might bring her to fulfil a bond thus given, however
distasteful the deed might be to her personally. No, her father must
at all hazards be prevented from seeking assistance from Owen Davies.
And yet the money must be had from somewhere, or they would be ruined.

Ah, she had it--Geoffrey Bingham should lend the money! He could well
afford it now, and she shrewdly guessed that he would not grudge the
coat off his back if he thought that by giving it he might directly or
indirectly help Beatrice. Her father must go up to town to see him,
she would have no letter-writing; one never knows how a letter may be
read. He must see Mr. Bingham, and if possible bring him down to
Bryngelly. In a moment every detail of the plot became clear to
Elizabeth's mind, and then she spoke.

"You must not go to Mr. Davies, father," she said; "he is a hard man,
and would only refuse and put you in a false position; you must go to
Mr. Bingham. Listen: he is rich now, and he is very fond of you and of
Beatrice. He will lend you a hundred pounds at once. You must go to
London by the early train to-morrow, and drive straight to his
chambers and see him. It will cost two pounds to get there and back,
but that cannot be helped; it is safer than writing, and I am sure
that you will not go for nothing. And see here, father, bring Mr.
Bingham back with you for a few days if you can. It will be a little
return for his kindness, and I know that he is not well. Beatrice had
a letter from him in which he said that he was so overworked that he
thought he must take a little rest soon. Bring him back for Whit-
Sunday."

Mr. Granger hesitated, demurred, and finally yielded. The weak,
querulous old farmer clergyman, worn out with many daily cares and
quite unsupported by mental resources, was but a tool in Elizabeth's
able hands. He did not indeed feel any humiliation at the idea of
trying to borrow the cash, for his nature was not finely strung, and
money troubles had made him callous to the verge of unscrupulousness;
but he did not like the idea of a journey to London, where he had not
been for more than twenty years, and the expenditure that it entailed.
Still he acted as Elizabeth bade him, even to keeping the expedition
secret from Beatrice. Beatrice, as her sister explained to him, was
proud as Lucifer, and might raise objections if she knew that he was
going to London to borrow money of Mr. Bingham. This indeed she would
certainly have done.

On the following afternoon--it was the Friday before Whit-Sunday, and
the last day of the Easter sittings--Geoffrey sat in his chambers, in
the worst possible spirits, thoroughly stale and worn out with work.
There was a consultation going on, and his client, a pig-headed
Norfolk farmer, who was bent upon proceeding to trial with some
extraordinary action for trespass against his own landlord, was
present with his solicitor. Geoffrey in a few short, clear words had
explained the absurdity of the whole thing, and strongly advised him
to settle, for the client had insisted on seeing him, refusing to be
put off with a written opinion. But the farmer was not satisfied, and
the solicitor was now endeavouring to let the pure light of law into
the darkness of his injured soul.

Geoffrey threw himself back in his chair, pushed the dark hair from
his brow, and pretended to listen. But in a minute his mind was far
away. Heavens, how tired he was! Well, there would be rest for a few
days--till Tuesday, when he had a matter that must be attended to--the
House had risen and so had the courts. What should he do with himself?
Honoria wished to go and stay with her brother, Lord Garsington, and,
for a wonder, to take Effie with her. He did not like it, but he
supposed that he should have to consent. One thing was, /he/ would not
go. He could not endure Garsington, Dunstan, and all their set. Should
he run down to Bryngelly? The temptation was very great; that would be
happiness indeed, but his common sense prevailed against it. No, it
was better that he should not go there. He would leave Bryngelly
alone. If Beatrice wished him to come she would have said so, and she
had never even hinted at such a thing, and if she had he did not think
that he would have gone. But he lacked the heart to go anywhere else.
He would stop in town, rest, and read a novel, for Geoffrey, when he
found time, was not above this frivolous occupation. Possibly, under
certain circumstances, he might even have been capable of writing one.
At that moment his clerk entered, and handed him a slip of paper with
something written on it. He opened it idly and read:

 "Revd. Mr. Granger to see you. Told him you were engaged, but he
  said he would wait."

Geoffrey started violently, so violently that both the solicitor and
the obstinate farmer looked up.

"Tell the gentleman that I will see him in a minute," he said to the
retreating clerk, and then, addressing the farmer, "Well, sir, I have
said all that I have to say. I cannot advise you to continue this
action. Indeed, if you wish to do so, you must really direct your
solicitor to retain some other counsel, as I will not be a party to
what can only mean a waste of money. Good afternoon," and he rose.

The farmer was convoyed out grumbling. In another moment Mr. Granger
entered, dressed in a somewhat threadbare suit of black, and his thin
white hair hanging, as usual, over his eyes. Geoffrey glanced at him
with apprehension, and as he did so noticed that he had aged greatly
during the last seven months. Had he come to tell him some ill news of
Beatrice--that she was ill, or dead, or going to be married?

"How do you do, Mr. Granger?" he said, as he stretched out his hand,
and controlling his voice as well as he could. "How are you? This is a
most unexpected pleasure."

"How do you do, Mr. Bingham?" answered the old man, while he seated
himself nervously in a chair, placing his hat with a trembling hand
upon the floor beside him. "Yes, thank you, I am pretty well, not very
grand--worn out with trouble as the sparks fly upwards," he added,
with a vague automatic recollection of the scriptural quotation.

"I hope that Miss Elizabeth and Be--that your daughters are well
also," said Geoffrey, unable to restrain his anxiety.

"Yes, yes, thank you, Mr. Bingham. Elizabeth isn't very grand either,
complains of a pain in her chest, a little bilious perhaps--she always
is bilious in the spring."

"And Miss Beatrice?"

"Oh, I think she's well--very quiet, you know, and a little pale,
perhaps; but she is always quiet--a strange woman Beatrice, Mr.
Bingham, a very strange woman, quite beyond me! I do not understand
her, and don't try to. Not like other women at all, takes no pleasure
in things seemingly; curious, with her good looks--very curious. But
nobody understands Beatrice."

Geoffrey breathed a sigh of relief. "And how are tithes being paid,
Mr. Granger? not very grandly, I fear. I saw that scoundrel Jones died
in prison."

Mr. Granger woke up at once. Before he had been talking almost at
random; the subject of his daughters did not greatly interest him.
What did interest him was this money question. Nor was it very
wonderful; the poor narrow-minded old man had thought about money till
he could scarcely find room for anything else, indeed nothing else
really touched him closely. He broke into a long story of his wrongs,
and, drawing a paper from his breast pocket, with shaking finger
pointed out to Geoffrey how that his clerical income for the last six
months had been at the rate of only forty pounds a year, upon which
sum even a Welsh clergyman could not consider himself passing rich.
Geoffrey listened and sympathised; then came a pause.

"That's how we've been getting on at Bryngelly, Mr. Bingham," Mr.
Granger said presently, "starving, pretty well starving. It's only you
who have been making money; we've been sitting on the same dock-leaf
while you have become a great man. If it had not been for Beatrice's
salary--she's behaved very well about the salary, has Beatrice--I am
sure I don't understand how the poor girl clothes herself on what she
keeps; I know that she had to go without a warm cloak this winter,
because she got a cough from it--we should have been in the workhouse,
and that's where we shall be yet," and he rubbed the back of his
withered hand across his eyes.

Geoffrey gasped. Beatrice with scarcely enough means to clothe herself
--Beatrice shivering and becoming ill from the want of a cloak while
/he/ lived in luxury! It made him sick to think of it. For a moment he
could say nothing.

"I have come here--I've come," went on the old man in a broken voice,
broken not so much by shame at having to make the request as from fear
lest it should be refused, "to ask you if you could lend me a little
money. I don't know where to turn, I don't indeed, or I would not do
it, Mr. Bingham. I have spent my last pound to get here. If you could
lend me a hundred pounds I'd give you note of hand for it and try to
pay it back little by little; we might take twenty pounds a year from
Beatrice's salary----"

"Don't, please--do not talk of such a thing!" ejaculated the horrified
Geoffrey. "Where the devil is my cheque-book? Oh, I know, I left it in
Bolton Street. Here, this will do as well," and he took up a draft
note made out to his order, and, rapidly signing his name on the back
of it, handed it to Mr. Granger. It was in payment of the fees in the
great case of Parsons and Douse and some other matters. Mr. Granger
took the draft, and, holding it close to his eyes, glanced at the
amount; it was £200.

"But this is double what I asked for," he said doubtfully. "Am I to
return you £100?"

"No, no," answered Geoffrey, "I daresay that you have some debts to
pay. Thank Heaven, I can get on very well and earn more money than I
want. Not enough clothing--it is shocking to think of!" he added, more
to himself than to his listener.

The old man rose, his eyes full of tears. "God bless you," he said,
"God bless you. I do not know how to thank you--I don't indeed," and
he caught Geoffrey's hand between his trembling palms and pressed it.

"Please do not say any more, Mr. Granger; it really is only a matter
of mutual obligation. No, no, I don't want any note of hand. If I were
to die it might be used against you. You can pay me whenever it is
convenient."

"You are too good, Mr. Bingham," said the old clergyman. "Where could
another man be found who would lend me £200 without security?" (where
indeed!) "By the way," he added, "I forgot; my mind is in such a
whirl. Will you come back with me for a few days to Bryngelly? We
shall all be so pleased if you can. Do come, Mr. Bingham; you look as
though you want a change, you do indeed."

Geoffrey dropped his hand heavily on the desk. But half an hour before
he had made up his mind not to go to Bryngelly. And now----

The vision of Beatrice rose before his eyes. Beatrice who had gone
cold all winter and never told him one word of their biting poverty--
the longing for the sight of Beatrice came into his heart, and like a
hurricane swept the defences of his reason to the level ground.
Temptation overwhelmed him; he no longer struggled against it. He must
see her, if it was only to say good-bye.

"Thank you," he said quietly, lifting his bowed head. "Yes, I have
nothing particular to do for the next day or two. I think that I will
come. When do you go back?"

"Well, I thought of taking the night mail, but I feel so tired. I
really don't know. I think I shall go by the nine o'clock train
to-morrow."

"That will suit me very well," said Geoffrey; "and now what are you
going to do to-night? You had better come and dine and sleep at my
house. No dress clothes? Oh, never mind; there are some people coming
but they won't care; a clergyman is always dressed. Come along and I
will get that draft cashed. The bank is shut, but I can manage it."



                              CHAPTER XX

                          BACK AT BRYNGELLY

Geoffrey and Mr. Granger reached Bolton Street about six o'clock. The
drawing-room was still full of callers. Lady Honoria's young men
mustered in great force in those days. They were very inoffensive
young men and Geoffrey had no particular objection to them. Only he
found it difficult to remember all their names. When Geoffrey entered
the drawing-room there were no fewer than five of them, to say nothing
of two stray ladies, all superbly dressed and sitting metaphorically
at Honoria's very pretty feet. Otherwise their contributions to the
general store of amusement did not amount to much, for her ladyship
did most of the talking.

Geoffrey introduced Mr. Granger, whom Honoria could not at first
remember. Nor did she receive the announcement that he was going to
dine and stay the night with any particular enthusiasm. The young men
melted away at Geoffrey's advent like mists before a rising sun. He
greeted them civilly enough, but with him they had nothing in common.
To tell the truth they were a little afraid of him. This man with his
dark handsome face sealed with the stamp of intellect, his powerful-
looking form (ill dressed, according to their standard) and his great
and growing reputation, was a person with whom they had no sympathy,
and who, they felt, had no sympathy with them. We talk as though there
is one heaven and one hell for all of us, but here must be some
mistake. An impassable gulf yawns between the different classes of
mankind. What has such a man as Geoffrey to do with the feeble male
and female butterflies of a London drawing-room? There is only one
link between them: they live on the same planet.

When the fine young men and the two stray ladies had melted away,
Geoffrey took Mr. Granger up to his room. Coming downstairs again he
found Lady Honoria waiting for him in the study.

"Is that individual really going to dine and sleep here?" she asked.

"Certainly, Honoria, and he has brought no dress clothes," he
answered.

"Really, Geoffrey, it is too bad of you," said the lady with some
pardonable irritation. "Why do you bring people to dinner in this
promiscuous way? It will quite upset the table. Just fancy asking an
old Welsh clergyman to dine, who has not the slightest pretensions to
being a gentleman, when one has the Prime Minister and a Bishop coming
--and a clergyman without dress clothes too. What has he come for?"

"He came to see me on business, and as to the people coming to dinner,
if they don't like it they can grumble when they go home. By the way,
Honoria, I am going down to Wales for a day or two to-morrow. I want a
change."

"Indeed! Going to see the lovely Beatrice, I suppose. You had better
be careful, Geoffrey. That girl will get you into a mess, and if she
does there are plenty of people who are ready to make an example of
you. You have enemies enough, I can tell you. I am not jealous, it is
not in my line, but you are too intimate with that girl, and you will
be sorry for it one day."

"Nonsense," said Geoffrey angrily, but nevertheless he felt that Lady
Honoria's words were words of truth. It struck him, moreover, that she
must feel this strongly, or she would not have spoken in that tone.
Honoria did not pose as a household philosopher. Still he would not
draw back now. His heart was set on seeing Beatrice.

"Am I to understand," went on his wife, "that you still object to my
staying with the Garsingtons? I think it is a little hard if I do not
make a fuss about your going to see your village paragon, that you
should refuse to allow me to visit my own brother."

Geoffrey felt that he was being bargained with. It was degrading, but
in the extremity of his folly he yielded.

"Go if you like," he said shortly, "but if you take Effie, mind she is
properly looked after, that is all," and he abruptly left the room.

Lady Honoria looked after him, slowly nodding her handsome head. "Ah,"
she said to herself, "I have found out how to manage you now. You have
your weak point like other people, Master Geoffrey--and it spells
Beatrice. Only you must not go too far. I am not jealous, but I am not
going to have a scandal for fifty Beatrices. I will not allow you to
lose your reputation and position. Just imagine a man like that pining
for a village girl--she is nothing more! And they talk about his being
so clever. Well, he always liked ladies' society; that is his failing,
and now he has burnt his fingers. They all do sooner or later,
especially these clever men. The women flatter them, that's it. Of
course the girl is trying to get hold of him, and she might do worse,
but so surely as my name is Honoria Bingham I will put a spoke in her
wheel before she has done. Bah! and they laugh at the power of women
when a man like Geoffrey, with all the world to lose, grows love-sick
for a pretty face; it is a /very/ pretty face by the way. I do believe
that if I were out of the way he would marry her. But I am in the way,
and mean to stay there. Well, it is time to dress for dinner. I only
hope that old clown of a clergyman won't do something ridiculous. I
shall have to apologise for him."

Dinner-time had come; it was a quarter past eight, and the room was
filled with highly bred people all more or less distinguished. Mr.
Granger had duly appeared, arrayed in his threadbare black coat,
relieved, however, by a pair of Geoffrey's dress shoes. As might have
been expected, the great folk did not seem surprised at his presence,
or to take any particular notice of his attire, the fact being that
such people never are surprised. A Zulu chief in full war dress would
only excite a friendly interest in their breasts. On the contrary they
recognised vaguely that the old gentleman was something out of the
common run, and as such worth cultivating. Indeed the Prime Minister,
hearing casually that he was a clergyman from Wales, asked to be
introduced to him, and at once fell into conversation about tithes, a
subject of which Mr. Granger was thoroughly master.

Presently they went down to dinner, Mr. Granger escorting the wife of
the Bishop, a fat and somewhat apoplectic lady, blessed with an
excellent appetite. On his other side was the Prime Minister, and
between the two he got on very well, especially after a few glasses of
wine. Indeed, both the apoplectic wife of the Bishop and the head of
Her Majesty's Government were subsequently heard to declare that Mr.
Granger was a very entertaining person. To the former he related with
much detail how his daughter had saved their host's life, and to the
latter he discoursed upon the subject of tithes, favouring him with
his ideas of what legislation was necessary to meet the question.
Somewhat to his own surprise, he found that his views were received
with attention and even with respect. In the main, too, they received
the support of the Bishop, who likewise felt keenly on the subject of
tithes. Never before had Mr. Granger had such a good dinner nor
mingled with company so distinguished. He remembered both till his
dying day.

Next morning Geoffrey and Mr. Granger started before Lady Honoria was
up. Into the details of their long journey to Wales (in a crowded
third-class carriage) we need not enter. Geoffrey had plenty to think
of, but his fears had vanished, as fears sometimes do when we draw
near to the object of them, and had been replaced by a curious
expectancy. He saw now, or thought he saw, that he had been making a
mountain out of a molehill. Probably it meant nothing at all. There
was no real danger. Beatrice liked him, no doubt; possibly she had
even experienced a fit of tenderness towards him. Such things come and
such things go. Time is a wonderful healer of moral distempers, and
few young ladies endure the chains of an undesirable attachment for a
period of seven whole months. It made him almost blush to think that
this might be so, and that the gratuitous extension of his misfortune
to Beatrice might be nothing more than the working of his own
unconscious vanity--a vanity which, did she know of it, would move her
to angry laughter.

He remembered how once, when he was quite a young fellow, he had been
somewhat smitten with a certain lady, who certainly, if he might judge
from her words and acts, reciprocated the sentiment. And he remembered
also, how when he met that lady some months afterwards she treated him
with a cold indifference, indeed almost with an insolence, that quite
bewildered him, making him wonder how the same person could show in
such different lights, till at length, mortified and ashamed by his
mistake, he had gone away in a rage and seen her face no more. Of
course he had set it down to female infidelity; he had served her
turn, she had made a fool of him, and that was all she wanted. Now he
might enjoy his humiliation. It did not occur to him that it might be
simple "cussedness," to borrow an energetic American term, or that she
had not really changed, but was angry with him for some reason which
she did not choose to show. It is difficult to weigh the motives of
women in the scales of male experience, and many other men besides
Geoffrey have been forced to give up the attempt and to console
themselves with the reflection that the inexplicable is generally not
worth understanding.

Yes, probably it would be the same case over again. And yet, and yet--
was Beatrice of that class? Had she not too much of a man's
straightforwardness of aim to permit her to play such tricks? In the
bottom of his soul he thought that she had, but he would not admit it
to himself. The fact of the matter was that, half unknowingly, he was
trying to drug his conscience. He knew that in his longing to see her
dear face once more he had undertaken a dangerous thing. He was about
to walk with her over an abyss on a bridge which might bear them, or--
might break. So long as he walked there alone it would be well, but
would it bear them /both?/ Alas for the frailty of human nature, this
was the truth; but he would not and did not acknowledge it. He was not
going to make love to Beatrice, he was going to enjoy the pleasure of
her society. In friendship there could be no harm.

It is not difficult thus to still the qualms of an uneasy mind, more
especially when the thing in question at its worst is rather an
offence against local custom than against natural law. In many
countries of the world--in nearly all countries, indeed, at different
epochs of their history--it would have been no wrong that Geoffrey and
Beatrice should love each other, and human nature in strong temptation
is very apt to override artificial barriers erected to suit the
convenience or promote the prosperity of particular sections of
mankind. But, as we have heard, even though all things may be lawful,
yet all things are not expedient. To commit or even to condone an act
because the principle that stamps it as wrong will admit of argument
on its merits is mere sophistry, by the aid of which we might prove
ourselves entitled to defy the majority of laws of all calibres. Laws
vary to suit the generations, but each generation must obey its own,
or confusion will ensue. A deed should be judged by its fruits; it may
even be innocent in itself, yet if its fruits are evil the doer in a
sense is guilty.

Thus in some countries to mention the name of your mother-in-law
entails the most unpleasant consequences on that intimate relation.
Nobody can say that to name the lady is a thing wicked in itself; yet
the man who, knowing the penalties which will ensue, allows himself,
even in a fit of passion against that relative, to violate the custom
and mention her by name is doubtless an offender. Thus, too, the
result of an entanglement between a woman and a man already married
generally means unhappiness and hurt to all concerned, more especially
to the women, whose prospects are perhaps irretrievably injured
thereby. It is useless to point to the example of the patriarchs, some
foreign royal families, and many respectable Turks; it is useless to
plead that the love is deep and holy love, for which a man or woman
might well live and die, or to show extenuating circumstances in the
fact of loneliness, need of sympathy, and that the existing marriage
is a hollow sham. The rule is clear. A man may do most things except
cheat at cards or run away in action; a woman may break half-a-dozen
hearts, or try to break them, and finally put herself up at auction
and take no harm at all--but neither of them may in any event do
/this/.

Not that Geoffrey, to do him justice, had any such intentions. Most
men are incapable of plots of that nature. If they fall, it is when
the voice of conscience is lost in the whirlwind of passion, and
counsel is darkened by the tumultuous pleadings of the heart. Their
sin is that they will, most of them, allow themselves to be put in
positions favourable to the development of these disagreeable
influences. It is not safe to light cigarettes in a powder factory. If
Geoffrey had done what he ought to have done, he would never have gone
to Bryngelly, and there would have been no story to tell, or no more
than there usually is.



At length Mr. Granger and his guest reached Bryngelly; there was
nobody to meet them, for nobody knew that they were coming, so they
walked up to the Vicarage. It was strange to Geoffrey once more to
pass by the little church through those well-remembered, wind-torn
pines and see that low long house. It seemed wonderful that all should
still be just as it was, that there should be no change at all, when
he himself had seen so much. There was Beatrice's home; where was
Beatrice?

He passed into the house like a man in a dream. In another moment he
was in the long parlour where he had spent so many happy hours, and
Elizabeth was greeting him. He shook hands with her, and as he did so,
noticed vaguely that she too was utterly unchanged. Her straw-coloured
hair was pushed back from the temples in the same way, the mouth wore
the same hard smile, her light eyes shone with the same cold look; she
even wore the same brown dress. But she appeared to be very pleased to
see him, as indeed she was, for the game looked well for Elizabeth.
Her father kissed her hurriedly, and bustled from the room to lock up
his borrowed cash, leaving them together.

Somehow Geoffrey's conversational powers failed him. Where was
Beatrice? she ought to be back from school. It was holiday time
indeed. Could she be away?

He made an effort, and remarked absently that things seemed very
unchanged at Bryngelly.

"You are looking for Beatrice," said Elizabeth, answering his thought
and not his words. "She has gone out walking, but I think she will be
back soon. Excuse me, but I must go and see about your room."

Geoffrey hung about a little, then he lit his pipe and strolled down
to the beach, with a vague unexpressed idea of meeting Beatrice. He
did not meet Beatrice, but he met old Edward, who knew him at once.

"Lord, sir," he said, "it's queer to see you here again, specially
when I thinks as how I saw you first, and you a dead 'un to all
purposes, with your mouth open, and Miss Beatrice a-hanging on to your
hair fit to pull your scalp off. You never was nearer old Davy than
you was that night, sir, nor won't be. And now you've been spared to
become a Parliament man, I hears, and much good may you do there--it
will take all your time, sir--and I think, sir, that I should like to
drink your health."

Geoffrey put his hand in his pocket and gave the old man a sovereign.
He could afford to do so now.

"Does Miss Beatrice go out canoeing now?" he asked while Edward
mumbled his astonished thanks.

"At times, sir--thanking you kindly; it ain't many suvrings as comes
my way--though I hate the sight on it, I do. I'd like to stave a hole
in the bottom of that there cranky concern; it ain't safe, and that's
the fact. There'll be another accent out of it one of these fine days
and no coming to next time. But, Lord bless you, it's her way of
pleasuring herself. She's a queer un is Miss Beatrice, and she gets
queerer and queerer, what with their being so tight screwed up at the
Vicarage, no tithes and that, and one thing and another. Not but what
I'm thinking, sir," he added in a portentous whisper, "as the squire
has got summut to do with it. He's a courting of her, he is; he's as
hard after her as a dog fish after a stray herring, and why she can't
just say yes and marry him I'm sure I don't know."

"Perhaps she doesn't like him," said Geoffrey coldly.

"May be, sir, may be; maids all have their fancies, in whatssever walk
o' life it has pleased God to stick 'em, but it's a wonderful pity, it
is. He ain't no great shakes, he ain't, but he's a sound man--no girl
can't want a sounder--lived quiet all his days you see, sir, and
what's more he's got the money, and money's tight up at the Vicarage,
sir. Gals must give up their fancies sometimes, sir. Lord! a brace of
brats and she'd forget all about 'em. I'm seventy years old and I've
seen their ways, sir, though in a humble calling. You should say a
word to her, sir; she'd thank you kindly five years after. You'd do
her a good turn, sir, you would, and not a bad un as the saying goes,
and give it the lie--no, beg your pardon, that is the other way round
--she's bound to do you the bad turn having saved your life, though I
don't see how she could do that unless, begging your pardon, she made
you fall in love with her, being married, which though strange
wouldn't be wunnerful seeing what she is and seeing how I has been in
love with her myself since she was seven, old missus and all, who died
eight years gone and well rid of the rheumatics."

Beatrice was one of the few subjects that could unlock old Edward's
breast, and Geoffrey retired before his confusing but suggestive
eloquence. Hurriedly bidding the old man good-night he returned to the
house, and leaning on the gate watched the twilight dying on the bosom
of the west.

Suddenly, a bunch of wild roses in her girdle, Beatrice emerged from
the gathering gloom and stood before him face to face.



                             CHAPTER XXI

                           THE THIRD APPEAL

Face to face they stood, while at the vision of her sweetness his
heart grew still. Face to face, and the faint light fell upon her
tender loveliness and died in her deep eyes, and the faint breeze
fragrant with the breath of pines gently stirred her hair. Oh, it was
worth living to see her thus!

"I beg your pardon," she said in a puzzled tone, stepping forward to
pass the gate.

"/Beatrice!/"

She gave a little cry, and clutched the railing, else she would have
fallen. One moment she stayed so, looking up towards his face that was
hid in the deepening shadow--looking with wild eyes of hope and fear
and love.

"Is it you," she said at length, "or another dream?"

"It is I, Beatrice!" he answered, amazed.

She recovered herself with an effort.

"Then why did you frighten me so?" she asked. "It was unkind--oh, I
did not mean to say anything cross. What did I say? I forget. I am so
glad that you have come!" and she put her hand to her forehead and
looked at him again as one might gaze at a ghost from the grave.

"Did you not expect me?" Geoffrey asked.

"Expect you? no. No more than I expected----" and she stopped
suddenly.

"It is very odd," he said; "I thought you knew that your father was
going to ask me down. I returned from London with him."

"From London," she murmured. "I did not know; Elizabeth did not tell
me anything about it. I suppose that she forgot."

"Here I am at any rate, and how are you?"

"Oh, well now, quite well. There, I am all right again. It is very
wrong to frighten people in that way, Mr. Bingham," she added in her
usual voice. "Let me pass through the gate and I will shake hands with
you--if," she added, in a tone of gentle mockery, "one may shake hands
with so great a man. But I told you how it would be, did I not, just
before we were drowned together, you know? How is Effie?"

"Effie flourishes," he answered. "Do you know, you do not look very
grand. Your father told me that you had a cold in the winter," and
Geoffrey shivered as he thought of the cause.

"Oh, thank you, I have nothing to complain of. I am strong and well.
How long do you stay here?"

"Not long. Perhaps till Tuesday morning, perhaps till Monday."

Beatrice sighed. Happiness is short. She had not brought him here, she
would not have lifted a finger to bring him here, but since he had
come she wished that he was going to stay longer.

"It is supper time," she said; "let us go in."

So they went in and ate their supper. It was a happy meal. Mr. Granger
was in almost boisterous spirits. It is wonderful what a difference
the possession of that two hundred pounds made in his demeanour; he
seemed another man. It was true that a hundred of it must go in paying
debts, but a hundred would be left, which meant at least a year's
respite for him. Elizabeth, too, relaxed her habitual grimness; the
two hundred pounds had its influence on her also, and there were other
genial influences at work in her dark secret heart. Beatrice knew
nothing of the money and sat somewhat silent, but she too was happy
with the wild unreal happiness that sometimes visits us in dreams.

As for Geoffrey, if Lady Honoria could have seen him she would have
stared in astonishment. Of late he had been a very silent man, many
people indeed had found him a dull companion. But under the influence
of Beatrice's presence he talked and talked brilliantly. Perhaps he
was unconsciously striving to show at his very best before her, as a
man naturally does in the presence of a woman whom he loves. So
brilliantly did he talk that at last they all sat still and listened
to him, and they might have been worse employed.

At length supper was done, and Elizabeth retired to her room.
Presently, too, Mr. Granger was called out to christen a sick baby and
went grumbling, and they were left alone. They sat in the window-place
and looked out at the quiet night.

"Tell me about yourself," said Beatrice.

So he told her. He narrated all the steps by which he had reached his
present position, and showed her how from it he might rise to the
topmost heights of all. She did not look at him, and did not answer
him, but once when he paused, thinking that he had talked enough about
himself, she said, "Go on; tell me some more."

At last he had told her all.

"Yes," she said, "you have the power and the opportunity, and you will
one day be among the foremost men of your generation."

"I doubt it," he said with a sigh. "I am not ambitious. I only work
for the sake of work, not for what it will bring. One day I daresay
that I shall weary of it all and leave it. But while I do work, I like
to be among the first in my degree."

"Oh, no," she answered, "you must not give it up; you must go on and
on. Promise me," she continued, looking at him for the first time--
"promise me that while you have health and strength you will persevere
till you stand alone and quite pre-eminent. Then you can give it up."

"Why should I promise you this, Beatrice?"

"Because I ask it of you. Once I saved your life, Mr. Bingham, and it
gives me some little right to direct its course. I wish that the man
whom I saved to the world should be among the first men in the world,
not in wealth, which is an accident, but in intellect and force.
Promise me this and I shall be happy."

"I promise you," he said, "I promise that I will try to rise because
you ask it, not because the prospect attracts me; but as he spoke his
heart was wrung. It was bitter to hear her speak thus of a future in
which she would have no share, which, as her words implied, would be a
thing utterly apart from her, as much apart as though she were dead.

"Yes," he said again, "you gave me my life, and it makes me very
unhappy to think that I can give you nothing in return. Oh, Beatrice,
I will tell you what I have never told to any one. I am lonely and
wretched. With the exception of yourself, I do not think that there is
anybody who really cares for--I mean who really sympathises with me in
the world. I daresay that it is my own fault and it sounds a
humiliating thing to say, and, in a fashion, a selfish thing. I never
should have said it to any living soul but you. What is the use of
being great when there is nobody to work for? Things might have been
different, but the world is a hard place. If you--if you----"

At this moment his hand touched hers; it was accidental, but in the
tenderness of his heart he yielded to the temptation and took it. Then
there was a moment's pause, and very gently she drew her hand away and
thrust it in her bosom.

"You have your wife to share your fortune," she said; "you have Effie
to inherit it, and you can leave your name to your country."

Then came a heavy pause.

"And you," he said, breaking it, "what future is there for you?"

She laughed softly. "Women have no future and they ask none. At least
I do not now, though once I did. It is enough for them if they can
ever so little help the lives of others. That is their happiness, and
their reward is--rest."



Just then Mr. Granger came back from his christening, and Beatrice
rose and went to bed.

"Looks a little pale, doesn't she, Mr. Bingham?" said her father. "I
think she must be troubled in her mind. The fact is--well, there is no
reason why I should not tell you; she thinks so much of you, and you
might say a word to brighten her up--well, it's about Mr. Davies. I
fancy, you know, that she likes him and is vexed because he does not
come forward. Well, you see--of course I may be mistaken, but I have
sometimes thought that he may. I have seen him look as if he was
thinking of it, though of course it is more than Beatrice has got any
right to expect. She's only got herself and her good looks to give
him, and he's a rich man. Think of it, Mr. Bingham," and the old
gentleman turned up his eyes piously, "just think what a thing it
would be for her, and indeed for all of us, if it should please God to
send a chance like that in her way; she would be rich for life, and
such a position! But it is possible; one never knows; he might take a
fancy to her. At any rate, Mr. Bingham, I think you could cheer her up
a little; there is no need for her to give up hope yet."

Geoffrey burst into a short grim laugh. The idea of Beatrice
languishing for Owen Davies, indeed the irony of the whole position,
was too much for his sense of humour.

"Yes," he said, "I daresay that it might be a good match for her, but
I do not know how she would get on with Mr. Davies."

"Get on! why, well enough, of course. Women are soft, and can squeeze
into most holes, especially if they are well lined. Besides, he may be
a bit heavy, but I think she is pining for him, and it's a pity that
she should waste her life like that. What, are you going to bed? Well,
good-night--good-night."

Geoffrey did go to bed, but not to sleep. For a long while he lay
awake, thinking. He thought of the last night which he had spent in
this little room, of its strange experiences, of all that had happened
since, and of the meeting of to-day. Could he, after that meeting, any
longer doubt what were the feelings with which Beatrice regarded him?
It was difficult to so, and yet there was still room for error. Then
he thought of what old Edward had said to him, and of what Mr. Granger
had said with reference to Beatrice and Owen Davies. The views of both
were crudely and even vulgarly expressed, but they coincided, and,
what was more, there was truth in them, and he knew it. The idea of
Beatrice marrying Mr. Davies, to put it mildly, was repulsive to him;
but had he any claim to stand between her and so desirable a
settlement in life? Clearly, he had not, his conscience told him so.

Could it be right, moreover, that this kind of tie which existed
between them should be knitted more closely? What would it mean?
Trouble, and nothing but trouble, more especially to Beatrice, who
would fret her days away to no end. He had done wrong in coming here
at all, he had done wrong in taking her hand. He would make the only
reparation in his power (as though in such a case as that of Beatrice
reparation were now possible)! He would efface himself from her life
and see her no more. Then she might learn to forget him, or, at the
worst, to remember him with but a vague regret. Yes, cost what it
might, he would force himself to do it before any actual mischief
ensued. The only question was, should he not go further? Should he not
tell her that she would do well to marry Mr. Davies?

Pondering over this most painful question, at last he went to sleep.

When men in Geoffrey's unhappy position turn penitent and see the
error of their ways, the prudent resolves that ensue are apt to
overshoot the mark and to partake of an aggressive nature. Not
satisfied with leaving things alone, they must needs hasten to
proclaim their new-found virtue to the partner of their fault, and
advertise their infallible specific (to be taken by the partner) for
restoring the /status quo ante/. Sometimes as a consequence of this
pious zeal they find themselves misunderstood, or even succeed in
precipitating the catastrophe which they laudably desire to prevent.



The morrow was Whit-Sunday, and a day that Geoffrey had occasion to
remember for the rest of his life. They all met at breakfast and
shortly afterwards went to church, the service being at half-past ten.
By way of putting into effect the good resolutions with which he was
so busy paving an inferno of his own, Geoffrey did not sit by
Beatrice, but took a seat at the end of the little church, close to
the door, and tried to console himself by looking at her.

It was a curious sullen-natured day, and although there was not very
much sun the air was as hot as though they were in midsummer. Had they
been in a volcanic region, Geoffrey would have thought that such
weather preceded a shock of earthquake. As it was he knew that the
English climate was simply indulging itself at the expense of the
population. But as up to the present, the season had been cold, this
knowledge did not console him. Indeed he felt so choked in the stuffy
little church that just before the sermon (which he happened to be
aware was /not/ written by Beatrice) he took an opportunity to slip
out unobserved. Not knowing where to go, he strolled down to the
beach, on which there was nobody to be seen, for, as has been
observed, Bryngelly slept on Sundays. Presently, however, a man
approached walking rapidly, and to all appearance aimlessly, in whom
he recognised Owen Davies. He was talking to himself while he walked,
and swinging his arms. Geoffrey stepped aside to let him pass, and as
he did so was surprised and even shocked to see the change in the man.
His plump healthy-looking face had grown thin, and wore a half sullen,
half pitiful expression; there were dark circles round his blue eyes,
once so placid, and his hair would have been the better for cutting.
Geoffrey wondered if he had had an illness. At that moment Owen
chanced to look round and saw him.

"How do you do, Mr. Bingham?" he said. "I heard that you were here.
They told me at the station last night. You see this is a small place
and one likes to know who comes and goes," he added as though in
excuse.

He walked on and Geoffrey walked with him.

"You do not look well, Mr. Davies," he said. "Have you been laid up?"

"No, no," he answered, "I am quite right; it is only my mind that is
ill."

"Indeed," said Geoffrey, thinking that he certainly did look strange.
"Perhaps you live too much alone and it depresses you."

"Yes, I live alone, because I can't help myself. What is a man to do,
Mr. Bingham, when the woman he loves will not marry him, won't look at
him, treats him like dirt?"

"Marry somebody else," suggested Geoffrey.

"Oh, it is easy for you to say that--you have never loved anybody, and
you don't understand. I cannot marry anybody else, I want her only."

"Her? Whom?"

"Who! why, Beatrice--whom else could a man want to marry, if once he
had seen her. But she will not have me; she hates me."

"Really," said Geoffrey.

"Yes, really, and do you know why? Shall I tell you why? I will tell
you," and he grasped him by the arm and whispered hoarsely in his ear:
"Because she loves /you/, Mr. Bingham."

"I tell you what it is, Mr. Davies," said Geoffrey shaking his arm
free, "I am not going to stand this kind of thing. You must be off
your head."

"Don't be angry with me," he answered. "It is true. I have watched her
and I know that it is true. Why does she write to you every week, why
does she always start and listen when anybody mentions your name? Oh,
Mr. Bingham," Owen went on piteously, "be merciful--you have your wife
and lots of women to make love to if you wish--leave me Beatrice. If
you don't I think that I shall go crazed. I have always loved her,
ever since she was a child, and now my love travels faster and grows
stronger every day, and carries me away with it like a rock rolling
down a hill. You can only bring Beatrice to shame, but I can give her
everything, as much money as she wants, all that she wants, and I will
make her a good husband; I will never leave her side."

"I have no doubt that would be delightful for her," answered Geoffrey;
"but does it not strike you that all this is just a little
undignified? These remarks, interesting as they are, should be made to
Miss Granger, not to me, Mr. Davies."

"I know," he said, "but I don't care; it is my only chance, and what
do I mind about being undignified? Oh, Mr. Bingham, I have never loved
any other woman, I have been lonely all my days. Do not stand in my
path now. If you only knew what I have suffered, how I have prayed God
night after night to give me Beatrice, you would help me. Say that you
will help me! You are one of those men who can do anything; she will
listen to you. If you tell her to marry me she will do so, and I shall
bless you my whole life."

Geoffrey looked upon this abject suppliant with the most unmitigated
scorn. There is always something contemptible in the sight of one man
pleading to another for assistance in his love affairs--that is a
business which he should do for himself. How much greater, then, is
the humiliation involved when the amorous person asks the aid of one
whom he believes to be his rival--his successful rival--in the lady's
affection?

"Do you know, Mr. Davies," Geoffrey said, "I think that I have had
enough of this. I am not in a position to force Miss Granger to accept
advances which appear to be unwelcome according to your account. But
if I get an opportunity I will do this: I will tell her what you say.
You really must manage the rest for yourself. Good morning to you, Mr.
Davies."

He turned sharply and went while Owen watched him go.

"I don't believe him," he groaned to himself. "He will try to make her
his lover. Oh, God help me--I cannot bear to think of it. But if he
does, and I find him out, let him be careful. I will ruin him, yes, I
will ruin him! I have the money and I can do it. Ah, he thinks me a
fool, they all think me a fool, but I haven't been quiet all these
years for nothing. I can make a noise if necessary. And if he is a
villain, God will help me to destroy him. I have prayed to God, and
God will help me."

Then he went back to the Castle. Owen Davies was a type of the class
of religious men who believe that they can enlist the Almighty on the
side of their desires, provided only that those desires receive the
sanction of human law or custom.



Thus within twenty-four hours Geoffrey received no less than three
appeals to help the woman whom he loved to the arms of a distasteful
husband. No wonder then that he grew almost superstitious about the
matter.



                             CHAPTER XXII

                           A NIGHT OF STORM

That afternoon the whole Vicarage party walked up to the farm to
inspect another litter of young pigs. It struck Geoffrey, remembering
former editions, that the reproductive powers of Mr. Granger's old sow
were something little short of marvellous, and he dreamily worked out
a calculation of how long it would take her and her progeny to produce
a pig to every square yard of the area of plucky little Wales. It
seemed that the thing could be done in six years, which was absurd, so
he gave up calculating.

He had no words alone with Beatrice that afternoon. Indeed, a certain
coldness seemed to have sprung up between them. With the almost
supernatural quickness of a loving woman's intuition, she had divined
that something was passing in his mind, inimical to her most vital
interests, so she shunned his company, and received his conventional
advances with a politeness which was as cold as it was crushing. This
did not please Geoffrey; it is one thing (in her own interests, of
course) to make up your mind heroically to abandon a lady whom you do
not wish to compromise, and quite another to be snubbed by that lady
before the moment of final separation. Though he never put the idea
into words or even defined it in his mind--for Geoffrey was far too
anxious and unhappy to be flippant, at any rate in thought--he would
at heart have wished her to remain the same, indeed to wax ever
tenderer, till the fatal time of parting arrived, and even to show
appreciation of his virtuous conduct.

But to the utter destruction of most such hands as Geoffrey held,
loving women never will play according to the book. Their conduct
imperils everything, for it is obvious that it takes two to bring an
affair of this nature to a dignified conclusion, even when the stakes
are highest, and the matter is one of life and death. Beatrice after
all was very much of a woman, and she did not behave much better than
any other woman would have done. She was angry and suspicious, and she
showed it, with the result that Geoffrey grew angry also. It was cruel
of her, he thought, considering all things. He forgot that she could
know nothing of what was in his mind, however much she might guess;
also as yet he did not know the boundless depth and might of her
passion for him, and all that it meant to her. Had he realised this he
would have acted very differently.



They came home and took tea, then Mr. Granger and Elizabeth made ready
to go to evening service. To Geoffrey's dismay Beatrice did the same.
He had looked forward to a quiet walk with her--really this was not to
be borne. Fortunately, or rather unfortunately, she was ready the
first, and he got a word with her.

"I did not know that you were going to church," he said; "I thought
that we might have had a walk together. Very likely I shall have to go
away early to-morrow morning."

"Indeed," answered Beatrice coldly. "But of course you have your work
to attend to. I told Elizabeth that I was coming to church, and I must
go; it is too sultry to walk; there will be a storm soon."

At this moment Elizabeth came in.

"Well, Beatrice," she said, "are you coming to church? Father has gone
on."

Beatrice pretended not to hear, and reflected a moment. He would go
away and she would see him no more. Could she let slip this last hour?
Oh, she could not do it!

In that moment of reflection her fate was sealed.

"No," she answered slowly, "I don't think that I am coming; it is too
sultry to go to church. I daresay that Mr. Bingham will accompany
you."

Geoffrey hastily disclaimed any such intention, and Elizabeth started
alone. "Ah!" she said to herself, "I thought that you would not come,
my dear."

"Well," said Geoffrey, when she had well gone, "shall we go out?"

"I think it is pleasanter here," answered Beatrice.

"Oh, Beatrice, don't be so unkind," he said feebly.

"As you like," she replied. "There is a fine sunset--but I think that
we shall have a storm."

They went out, and turned up the lonely beach. The place was utterly
deserted, and they walked a little way apart, almost without speaking.
The sunset was magnificent; great flakes of golden cloud were driven
continually from a home of splendour in the west towards the cold
lined horizon of the land. The sea was still quiet, but it moaned like
a thing in pain. The storm was gathering fast.

"What a lovely sunset," said Geoffrey at length.

"It is a fatal sort of loveliness," she answered; "it will be a bad
night, and a wet morrow. The wind is rising; shall we turn?"

"No, Beatrice, never mind the wind. I want to speak to you, if you
will allow me to do so."

"Yes," said Beatrice, "what about, Mr. Bingham."

To make good resolutions in a matter of this sort is comparatively
easy, but the carrying of them out presents some difficulties.
Geoffrey, conscience-stricken into priggishness, wished to tell her
that she would do well to marry Owen Davies, and found the matter
hard. Meanwhile Beatrice preserved silence.

"The fact is," he said at length, "I most sincerely hope you will
forgive me, but I have been thinking a great deal about you and your
future welfare."

"That is very kind of you," said Beatrice, with an ominous humility.

This was disconcerting, but Geoffrey was determined, and he went on in
a somewhat flippant tone born of the most intense nervousness and
hatred of his task. Never had he loved her so well as now in this
moment when he was about to counsel her to marry another man. And yet
he persevered in his folly. For, as so often happens, the shrewd
insight and knowledge of the world which distinguished Geoffrey as a
lawyer, when dealing with the affairs of others, quite deserted him in
this crisis of his own life and that of the woman who worshipped him.

"Since I have been here," he said, "I have had made to me no less than
three appeals on your behalf and by separate people--by your father,
who fancies that you are pining for Owen Davies; by Owen Davies, who
is certainly pining for you; and by old Edward, intervening as a kind
of domestic /amicus curiæ/."

"Indeed," said Beatrice, in a voice of ice.

"All these three urged the same thing--the desirability of your
marrying Owen Davies."

Beatrice's face grew quite pale, her lips twitched and her grey eyes
flashed angrily.

"Really," she said, "and have /you/ any advice to give on the subject,
Mr. Bingham?"

"Yes, Beatrice, I have. I have thought it over, and I think that--
forgive me again--that if you can bring yourself to it, perhaps you
had better marry him. He is not such a bad sort of man, and he is well
off."

They had been walking rapidly, and now they were reaching the spot
known as the "Amphitheatre," that same spot where Owen Davies had
proposed to Beatrice some seven months before.

Beatrice passed round the projecting edge of rock, and walked some way
towards the flat slab of stone in the centre before she answered.
While she did so a great and bitter anger filled her heart. She saw,
or thought she saw, it all. Geoffrey wished to be rid of her. He had
discerned an element of danger in their intimacy, and was anxious to
make that intimacy impossible by pushing her into a hateful marriage.
Suddenly she turned and faced him--turned like a thing at bay. The
last red rays of the sunset struck upon her lovely face made more
lovely still by its stamp of haughty anger: they lay upon her heaving
breast. Full in the eyes she looked him with those wide angry eyes of
hers--never before had he seen her so imperial a mien. Her dignity and
the power of her presence literally awed him, for at times Beatrice's
beauty was of that royal stamp which when it hides a heart, is a
compelling force, conquering and born to conquer.

"Does it not strike you, Mr. Bingham," she said quietly, "that you are
taking a very great liberty? Does it not strike you that no man who is
not a relation has any right to speak to a woman as you have spoken to
me?--that, in short, you have been guilty of what in most people would
be an impertinence? What right have you to dictate to me as to whom I
should or should not marry? Surely of all things in the world that is
my own affair."

Geoffrey coloured to the eyes. As would have been the case with most
men of his class, he felt her accusation of having taken a liberty, of
having presumed upon an intimacy, more keenly than any which she could
have brought against him.

"Forgive me," he said humbly. "I can only assure you that I had no
such intention. I only spoke--ill-judgedly, I fear--because--because I
felt driven to it."

Beatrice took no notice of his words, but went on in the same cold
voice.

"What right have you to speak of my affairs with Mr. Davies, with an
old boatman, or even with my father? Had I wished you to do so I
should have asked you. By what authority do you constitute yourself an
intermediary for the purpose of bringing about a marriage which you
are so good as to consider would be to my pecuniary interest? Do you
not know that such a matter is one which the woman concerned, the
woman whose happiness and self-respect are at stake, alone can judge
of? I have nothing more to say except this. I said just now that you
had been guilty of what would in most people be an impertinence. Well,
I will add something. In this case, Mr. Bingham, there are
circumstances which make it--a cruel insult!"

She stopped speaking, then suddenly, without the slightest warning,
burst into passionate weeping. As she did so, the first rush of the
storm passed over them, winnowing the air as with a thousand eagles'
wings, and was lost on the moaning depths beyond.

The light went out of the sky. Now Geoffrey could only see the faint
outlines of her weeping face. One moment he hesitated and one only;
then Nature prevailed against him, for the next she was in his arms.

Beatrice scarcely resisted him. Her energies seemed to fail her, or
perhaps she had spent them in her bitter words. Her head fell upon his
shoulder, and there she sobbed her fill. Presently she lifted it and
their lips met in a first long kiss. It was finished; this was the end
of it--and thus did Geoffrey prosper Owen Davies's suit.

"Oh, you are cruel, cruel!" he whispered in her ear. "You must have
known I loved you, Beatrice, that I spoke against myself because I
thought it to be my duty. You must have known that, to my sin and
sorrow, I have always loved you, that you have never been an hour from
my mind, that I have longed to see your face like a sick man for the
light. Tell me, did you not know it, Beatrice?"

"How should I know?" she answered very softly; "I could only guess,
and if indeed you love me how could you wish me to marry another man?
I thought that you had learned my weakness and took this way to
reproach me. Oh, Geoffrey, what have we done? What is there between
you and me--except our love?"

"It would have been better if we had been drowned together at the
first," he said heavily.

"No, no," she answered, "for then we never should have loved one
another. Better first to love, and then to die!"

"Do not speak so," he said; "let us sit here and be happy for a little
while to-night, and leave trouble till to-morrow."

And, where on a bygone day Beatrice had tarried with another wooer,
side by side they sat upon the great stone and talked such talk as
lovers use.

Above them moaned the rising gale, though sheltered as they were by
cliffs its breath scarcely stirred their hair. In front of them the
long waves boomed upon the beach, while far out to sea the crescent
moon, draped in angry light, seemed to ride the waters like a boat.



And were they alone with their great bliss, or did they only dream?
Nay, they were alone with love and lovers' joys, and all the truth was
told, and all their doubts were done. Now there was an end of hopes
and fears; now reason fell and Love usurped his throne, and at that
royal coming Heaven threw wide her gates. Oh, Sweetest and most dear!
Oh, Dearest and most sweet! Oh, to have lived to find this happy hour
--oh, in this hour to die!

See heaviness is behind us, see now we are one. Blow, you winds, blow
out your stormy heart; we know the secret of your strength, you rush
to your desire. Fall, deep waters of the sea, fall in thunder at the
feet of earth; we hear the music of your pleading.

Earth, and Seas, and Winds, sing your great chant of love! Heaven and
Space and Time, echo back the melody! For Life has called to us the
answer of his riddle! Heart to heart we sit, and lips to lips, and we
are more wise than Solomon, and richer than barbarian kings, for
Happiness is ours.

To this end were we born, Dearest and most sweet, and from all time
predestinate! To this end, Sweetest and most dear, do we live and die,
in death to find completer unity. For here is that secret of the world
which wise men search and cannot find, and here too is the gate of
Heaven.

Look into my eyes, and let me gaze on yours, and listen how these
things shall be. The world is but a mockery, and a shadow is our
flesh, for where once they were there shall be naught. Only Love is
real; Love shall endure till all the suns are dead, and yet be young.

Kiss me, thou Conqueror, for Destiny is overcome, Sorrow is gone by;
and the flame that we have hallowed upon this earthly altar shall
still burn brightly, and yet more bright, when yonder stars have lost
their fire.

But alas! words cannot give a fitting form to such a song as this. Let
music try! But music also folds her wings. For in so supreme an hour

 "A bolt is shot back somewhere in our breast,"

and through that opened door come sights and sounds such as cannot be
written.



They tell us it is madness, that this unearthly glory is but the
frenzy of a passion gross in its very essence. Let those think it who
will, but to dreamers let them leave their dreams. Why then, at such a
time, do visions come to children of the world like Beatrice and
Geoffrey? Why do their doubts vanish, and what is that breath from
heaven which they seem to feel upon their brow? The intoxication of
earthly love born of the meeting of youth and beauty. So be it! Slave,
bring more such wine and let us drink--to Immortality and to those
dear eyes that mirror forth a spirit's face!

Such loves indeed are few. For they must be real and deep, and natures
thus shaped are rare, nor do they often cross each other's line of
life. Yes, there are few who can be borne so high, and none can
breathe that ether long. Soon the wings which Love lent them in his
hour of revelation will shrink and vanish, and the borrowers will fall
back to the level of this world, happy if they escape uncrushed.
Perchance even in their life-days, they may find these spirit wings
again, overshadowing the altar of their vows in the hour of earthly
marriage, if by some happy fate, marriage should be within their
reach, or like the holy pinions of the goddess Nout, folded about a
coffin, in the time of earthly death. But scant are the occasions, and
few there are who know them.



Thus soared Beatrice and Geoffrey while the wild night beat around
them, making a fit accompaniment to their stormy loves. And thus they
too fell from heaven to earth.

"We must be going, Geoffrey; it grows late," said Beatrice. "Oh,
Geoffrey, Geoffrey, what have we done? What can be the end of all
this? It will bring trouble on you, I know that it must. The old
saying will come true. I saved your life, and I shall bring ruin on
you!"

It is characteristic of Beatrice that already she was thinking of the
consequences to Geoffrey, not of those to herself.

"Beatrice," said Geoffrey, "we are in a desperate position. Do you
wish to face it and come away with me, far away to the other side of
the world?"

"No, no," she answered vehemently, "it would be your ruin to abandon
the career that is before you. What part of the world could you go to
where you would not be known? Besides there is your wife to think of.
Ah, God, your wife--what would she say of me? You belong to her, you
have no right to desert her. And there is Effie too. No, Geoffrey, no,
I have been wicked enough to learn to love you--oh, as you were never
loved before, if it is wicked to do what one cannot help--but I am not
bad enough for this. Walk quicker, Geoffrey; we shall be late, and
they will suspect something."

Poor Beatrice, the pangs of conscience were finding her out!

"We are in a dreadful position," he said again. "Oh, dearest, I have
been to blame. I should never have come back here. It is my fault; and
though I never thought of this, I did my best to please you."

"And I thank you for it," she answered. "Do not deceive yourself,
Geoffrey. Whatever happens, promise me never for one moment to believe
that I reproached or blamed you. Why should I blame you because you
won my heart? Let me sooner blame the sea on which we floated, the
beach where we walked, the house in which we lived, and the Destiny
that brought us together. I am proud and glad to love you, dear, but I
am not so selfish as to wish to ruin you: Geoffrey--I had rather die."

"Don't talk so," he said, "I cannot bear it. What are we to do? Am I
to go away and see you no more? How can we live so, Beatrice?"

"Yes, Geoffrey," she answered heavily, taking him by the hand and
gazing up into his face, "you are to go away and see me no more, not
for years and years. This is what we have brought upon ourselves, it
is the price that we must pay for this hour which has gone. You are to
go away to-morrow, that we may be put out of temptation, and you must
come back no more. Sometimes I shall write to you, and sometimes
perhaps you will write to me, till the thing becomes a burden, then
you can stop. And whether you forget me or not--and, Geoffrey, I do
not think you will--you will know that I shall never forget you, whom
I saved from the sea--to love me."

There was something so sweet and infinitely tender about her words,
instinct as they were with natural womanly passion, that Geoffrey bent
at heart beneath their weight as a fir bends beneath the gentle,
gathering snow. What was he to do, how could he leave her? And yet she
was right. He must go, and go quickly, lest his strength might fail
him, and hand in hand they should pass a bourne from which there is no
return.

"Heaven help us, Beatrice," he said. "I will go to-morrow morning and,
if I can, I will keep away."

"You /must/ keep away. I will not see you any more. I will not bring
trouble on you, Geoffrey."

"You talk of bringing trouble on me," he said; "you say nothing of
yourself, and yet a man, even a man with eyes on him like myself, is
better fitted to weather such a storm. If it ruined me, how much more
would it ruin you?"

They were at the gate of the Vicarage now, and the wind rushed so
strongly through the firs that she needed to put her lips quite close
to his ear to make her words heard.

"Stop, one minute," she said, "perhaps you do not quite understand.
When a woman does what I have done, it is because she loves with all
her life and heart and soul, because all these are a part of her love.
For myself, I no longer care anything--I have /no/ self away from you;
I have ceased to be of myself or in my own keeping. I am of you and in
yours. For myself and my own fate or name I think no more; with my
eyes open and of my own free will I have given everything to you, and
am glad and happy to give it. But for you I still do care, and if I
took any step, or allowed you to take any that could bring sorrow on
you, I should never forgive myself. That is why we must part,
Geoffrey. And now let us go in; there is nothing more to say, except
this: if you wish to bid me good-bye, a last good-bye, dear Geoffrey,
I will meet you to-morrow morning on the beach."

"I shall leave at half-past eight," he said hoarsely.

"Then we will meet at seven," Beatrice said, and led the way into the
house.

Elizabeth and Mr. Granger were already seated at supper. They supped
at nine on Sunday nights; it was just half-past.

"Dear me," said the old gentleman, "we began to think that you two
must have been out canoeing and got yourselves drowned in good earnest
this time. What have you been doing?"

"We have had a long walk," answered Geoffrey; "I did not know that it
was so late."

"One wants to be pleased with one's company to walk far on such a
night as this," put in Elizabeth maliciously.

"And so we were--at least I was," Geoffrey answered with perfect
truth, "and the night is not so bad as you might think, at least under
the lee of the cliffs. It will be worse by and by!"

Then they sat down and made a desperate show of eating supper.
Elizabeth, the keen-eyed, noticed that Geoffrey's hand was shaking.
Now what, she wondered, would make the hand of a strong man shake like
a leaf? Deep emotion might do it, and Elizabeth thought that she
detected other signs of emotion in them both, besides that of
Geoffrey's shaking hand. The plot was working well, but could it be
brought to a climax? Oh, if he would only throw prudence to the winds
and run away with Beatrice, so that she might be rid of her, and free
to fight for her own hand.

Shortly after supper both Elizabeth and Beatrice went to bed, leaving
their father with Geoffrey.

"Well," said Mr. Granger, "did you get a word with Beatrice? It was
very kind of you to go that long tramp on purpose. Gracious, how it
blows! we shall have the house down presently. Lightning, too, I
declare."

"Yes," answered Geoffrey, "I did."

"Ah, I hope you told her that there was no need for her to give up
hope of him yet, of Mr. Davies, I mean?"

"Yes, I told her that--that is if the greater includes the less," he
added to himself.

"And how did she take it?"

"Very badly," said Geoffrey; "she seemed to think that I had no right
to interfere."

"Indeed, that is strange. But it doesn't mean anything. She's grateful
enough to you at heart, depend upon it she is, only she did not like
to say so. Dear me, how it blows; we shall have a night of it, a
regular gale, I declare. So you are going away to-morrow morning.
Well, the best of friends must part. I hope that you will often come
and see us. Good-bye."

Once more a sense of the irony of the position overcame Geoffrey, and
he smiled grimly as he lit his candle and went to bed. At the back of
the house was a long passage, which terminated at one end in the room
where he slept, and at the other in that occupied by Elizabeth and
Beatrice. This passage was lit by two windows, and built out of it
were two more rooms--that of Mr. Granger, and another which had been
Effie's. The windows of the passage, like most of the others in the
Vicarage, were innocent of shutters, and Geoffrey stood for a moment
at one of them, watching the lightning illumine the broad breast of
the mountain behind. Then looking towards the door of Beatrice's room,
he gazed at it with the peculiar reverence that sometimes afflicts
people who are very much in love, and, with a sigh, turned and sought
his own.

He could not sleep, it was impossible. For nearly two hours he lay
turning from side to side, and thinking till his brain seemed like to
burst. To-morrow he must leave her, leave her for ever, and go back to
his coarse unprofitable struggle with the world, where there would be
no Beatrice to make him happy through it all. And she, what of her?

The storm had lulled a little, now it came back in strength, heralded
by the lightning. He rose, threw on a dressing-gown, and sat by a
window watching it. Its tumult and fury seemed to ease his heart of
some little of its pain; in that dark hour a quiet night would have
maddened him.

In eight hours--eight short hours--this matter would be ended so far
as concerned their actual intercourse. It would be a secret locked for
ever in their two breasts, a secret eating at their hearts, cruel as
the worm that dieth not. Geoffrey looked up and threw out his heart's
thought towards his sleeping love. Then once more, as in a bygone
night, there broke upon his brain and being that mysterious spiritual
sense. Stronger and more strong it grew, beating on him in heavy
unnatural waves, till his reason seemed to reel and sink, and he
remembered naught but Beatrice, knew naught save that her very life
was with him now.

He stretched out his arms towards the place where she should be.

"Beatrice," he whispered to the empty air, "Beatrice! Oh, my love! my
sweet! my soul! Hear me, Beatrice!"

There came a pause, and ever the unearthly sympathy grew and gathered
in his heart, till it seemed to him as though separation had lost its
power and across dividing space they were mingled in one being.

A great gust shook the house and passed away along the roaring depths.

Oh! what was this? Silently the door opened, and a white draped form
passed its threshold. He rose, gasping; a terrible fear, a terrible
joy, took possession of him. The lightning flared out wildly in the
eastern sky. There in the fierce light she stood before him--she,
Beatrice, a sight of beauty and of dread. She stood with white arms
outstretched, with white uncovered feet, her bosom heaving softly
beneath her night-dress, her streaming hair unbound, her lips apart,
her face upturned, and a stamp of terrifying calm.

 "In the wide, blind eyes uplift
  Thro' the darkness and the drift."

Great Heaven, she was asleep!

Hush! she spoke.

"You called me, Geoffrey," she said, in a still, unnatural voice. "You
called me, my beloved, and I--have--come."

He rose aghast, trembling like an aspen with doubt and fear, trembling
at the sight of the conquering glory of the woman whom he worshipped.

See! She drew on towards him, and she was /asleep/. Oh, what could he
do?

Suddenly the draught of the great gale rushing through the house
caught the opened door and crashed it to.

She awoke with a wild stare of terror.

"Oh, God, where am I?" she cried.

"Hush, for your life's sake!" he answered, his faculties returning.
"Hush! or you are lost."

But there was no need to caution here to silence, for Beatrice's
senses failed her at the shock, and she sank swooning in his arms.



                            CHAPTER XXIII

                            A DAWN OF RAIN

That crash of the closing door did not awake Beatrice only; it awoke
both Elizabeth and Mr. Granger. Elizabeth sat up in bed straining her
eyes through the gloom to see what had happened. They fell on
Beatrice's bed--surely--surely----

Elizabeth slipped up, cat-like she crept across the room and felt with
her hand at the bed. Beatrice was not there. She sprang to the blind
and drew it, letting in such light as there was, and by it searched
the room. She spoke: "Beatrice, where are you?"

No answer.

"Ah--h," said Elizabeth aloud; "I understand. At last--at last!"

What should see do? Should she go and call her father and put them to
an open shame? No. Beatrice must come back some time. The knowledge
was enough; she wanted the knowledge to use if necessary. She did not
wish to ruin her sister unless in self-defence, or rather, for the
cause of self-advancement. Still less did she wish to injure Geoffrey,
against whom she had no grudge. So she peeped along the passage, then
returning, crept back to her bed like a snake into a hole and watched.

Mr. Granger, hearing the crash, thought that the front door had blown
open. Rising, he lit a candle and went to see.

But of all this Geoffrey knew nothing, and Beatrice naturally less
than nothing.

She lay senseless in his arms, her head rested on his shoulder, her
heavy hair streamed down his side almost to his knee. He lifted her,
touched her on the forehead with his lips and laid her on the bed.
What was to be done? Bring her back to life? No, he dared not--not
here. While she lay thus her helplessness protected her; but if once
more she was a living, loving woman here and so--oh, how should they
escape? He dared not touch her or look towards her--till he had made
up his mind. It was soon done. Here she must not bide, and since of
herself she could not go, why he must take her now, this moment!
However far Geoffrey fell short of virtue's stricter standard, let
this always be remembered in his favour.

He opened the door, and as he did so, thought that he heard some one
stirring in the house. And so he did; it was Mr. Granger in the
sitting-room. Hearing no more, Geoffrey concluded that it was the
wind, and turning, groped his way to the bed where Beatrice lay as
still as death. For one moment a horrible fear struck him that she
might be dead. He had heard of cases of somnambulists who, on being
startled from their unnatural sleep, only woke to die. It might be so
with her. Hurriedly he placed his hand upon her breast. Yes, her heart
stirred--faintly indeed, but still it stirred. She had only swooned.
Then he set his teeth, and placing his arms about her, lifted her as
though she were a babe. Beatrice was no slip of a girl, but a well-
grown woman of full size. He never felt her weight; it seemed nothing
to him. Stealthily as one bent on midnight murder, he stepped with her
to the door and through it into the passage. Then supporting her with
one arm, he closed the door with his left hand. Stealthily in the
gloom he passed along the corridor, his bare feet making no noise upon
the boarded floor, till he reached the bisecting passage leading from
the sitting-rooms.

He glanced up it apprehensively, and what he saw froze the blood in
his veins, for there coming down it, not eight paces from him, was Mr.
Granger, holding a candle in his hand. What could be done? To get back
to his room was impossible--to reach that of Beatrice was also
impossible. With an effort he collected his thoughts, and like a flash
of light it passed into his mind that the empty room was not two paces
from him. A stride and he had reached it. Oh, where was the handle?
and oh, if the room should be locked! By a merciful chance it was not.
He stepped through the door, knocking Beatrice's feet against the
framework as he did so, closed it--to shut it he had no time--and
stood gasping behind it.

The gleam of light drew nearer. Merciful powers! he had been seen--the
old man was coming in. What could he say? Tell the truth, that was
all; but who would believe such a story? why, it was one that he
should scarcely care to advance in a court of law. Could he expect a
father to believe it--a father finding a man crouched like a thief
behind a door at the dead of night with his lovely daughter senseless
in his arms? He had already thought of going straight to Mr. Granger,
but had abandoned the idea as hopeless. Who would believe this tale of
sleep-walking? For the first time in his life Geoffrey felt terribly
afraid, both for Beatrice and himself; the hair rose on his head, his
heart stood still, and a cold perspiration started on to his face.

"It's very odd," he heard the old man mutter to himself; "I could
almost swear that I saw something white go into that room. Where's the
handle? If I believed in ghosts--hullo! my candle has blown out! I
must go and hunt for a match. Don't quite like going in there without
a light."

For the moment they were saved. The fierce draught rushing through the
open crack of the door from the ill-fitting window had extinguished
the candle.

Geoffrey waited a few seconds to allow Mr. Granger to reach his room,
and then once more started on his awful journey. He passed out of the
room in safety; happily Beatrice showed no signs of recovery. A few
quick steps and he was at her own door. And now a new terror seized
him. What if Elizabeth was also walking the house or even awake? He
thought of putting Beatrice down at the door and leaving her there,
but abandoned the idea. To begin with, her father might see her, and
then how could her presence be accounted for? or if he did not, she
would certainly suffer ill effects from the cold. No, he must risk it,
and at once, though he would rather have faced a battery of guns. The
door fortunately was ajar. Geoffrey opened it with his foot, entered,
and with his foot pushed it to again. Suddenly he remembered that he
had never been in the room, and did not know which bed belonged to
Beatrice. He walked to the nearest; a deep-drawn breath told him that
it was the wrong one. Drawing some faint consolation from the fact
that Elizabeth was evidently asleep, he groped his way to the second
bed through the deep twilight of the room. The clothes were thrown
back. He laid Beatrice down and threw them over her. Then he fled.

As he reached the door he saw Mr. Granger's light disappear into his
own room and heard his door close. After that it seemed to him that he
took but two steps and was in his own place.

He burst out laughing; there was as much hysteria in the laugh as a
man gives way to. His nerves were shattered by struggle, love and
fear, and sought relief in ghastly merriment. Somehow the whole scene
reminded him of one in a comic opera. There was a ludicrous side to
it. Supposing that the political opponents, who already hated him so
bitterly, could have seen him slinking from door to door at midnight
with an unconscious lady in his arms--what would they have said?

He ceased laughing; the fit passed--indeed it was no laughing matter.
Then he thought of the first night of their strange communion, that
night before he had returned to London. The seed sown in that hour had
blossomed and borne fruit indeed. Who would have dreamed it possible
that he should thus have drawn Beatrice to him? Well, he ought to have
known. If it was possible that the words which floated through her
mind could arise in his as they had done upon that night, what was not
possible? And were there not other words, written by the same master-
hand, which told of such things as these:

"'Now--now,' the door is heard;
  Hark, the stairs! and near--
  Nearer--and here--
 'Now'! and at call the third,
  She enters without a word.

  Like the doors of a casket shrine,
  See on either side,
  Her two arms divide
  Till the heart betwixt makes sign,
 'Take me, for I am thine.'

  First, I will pray. Do Thou
  That ownest the soul,
  Yet wilt grant control
  To another, nor disallow
  For a time, restrain me now!"

Did they not run thus? Oh, he should have known! This he could plead,
and this only--that control had been granted to him.

But how would Beatrice fare? Would she come to herself safely? He
thought so, it was only a fainting fit. But when she did recover, what
would she do? Nothing rash, he prayed. And what could be the end of it
all? Who might say? How fortunate that the sister had been so sound
asleep. Somehow he did not trust Elizabeth--he feared her.

Well might Geoffrey fear her! Elizabeth's sleep was that of a weasel.
She too was laughing at this very moment, laughing, not loud but long
--the laugh of one who wins.

She had seen him enter, his burden in his arms; saw him come with it
to her own bedside, and had breathed heavily to warn him of his
mistake. She had watched him put Beatrice on her bed, and heard him
sigh and turn away; nothing had escaped her. As soon as he was gone,
she had risen and crept up to Beatrice, and finding that she was only
in a faint had left her to recover, knowing her to be in no danger.
Elizabeth was not a nervous person. Then she had listened till at
length a deep sigh told her of the return of her sister's
consciousness. After this there was a pause, till presently Beatrice's
long soft breaths showed that she had glided from swoon to sleep.

The slow night wore away, and at length the cold dawn crept through
the window. Elizabeth still watching, for she was not willing to lose
a single scene of a drama so entrancing in itself and so important to
her interests, saw her sister suddenly sit up in bed and press her
hands to her forehead, as though she was striving to recall a dream.
Then Beatrice covered her eyes with her hands and groaned heavily.
Next she looked at her watch, rose, drank a glass of water, and
dressed herself, even to the putting on of an old grey waterproof with
a hood to it, for it was wet outside.

"She is going to meet her lover," thought Elizabeth. "I wish I could
be there to see that too, but I have seen enough."

She yawned and appeared to wake. "What, Beatrice, going out already in
this pouring rain?" she said, with feigned astonishment.

"Yes, I have slept badly and I want to get some air," answered
Beatrice, starting and colouring; "I suppose that it was the storm."

"Has there been a storm?" said Elizabeth, yawning again. "I heard
nothing of it--but then so many things happen when one is asleep of
which one knows nothing at the time," she added sleepily, like one
speaking at random. "Mind that you are back to say good-bye to Mr.
Bingham; he goes by the early train, you know--but perhaps you will
see him out walking," and appearing to wake up thoroughly, she raised
herself in bed and gave her sister one piercing look.

Beatrice made no answer; that look sent a thrill of fear through her.
Oh; what had happened! Or was it all a dream? Had she dreamed that she
stood face to face with Geoffrey in his room before a great darkness
struck her and overwhelmed her? Or was it an awful truth, and if a
truth, how came she here again? She went to the pantry, found a morsel
of bread and ate it, for faintness still pursued her. Then feeling
better, she left the house and set her face towards the beach.



It was a dreary morning. The great wind had passed; now it only blew
in little gusts heavy with driving rain. The sea was sullen and grey
and grand. It beat in thunder on the shore and flew over the sunken
rocks in columns of leaden spray. The whole earth seemed one
desolation, and all its grief was centred in this woman's broken
heart.

Geoffrey, too, was up. How he had passed the remainder of that tragic
night we need not inquire--not too happily we may be sure. He heard
the front door close behind Beatrice, and followed out into the rain.

On the beach, some half of a mile away, he found her gazing at the
sea, a great white gull wheeling about her head. No word of greeting
passed between them; they only grasped each other's hands and looked
into each other's hollow eyes.

"Come under the shelter of the cliff," he said, and she came. She
stood beneath the cliff, her head bowed low, her face hidden by the
hood, and spoke.

"Tell me what has happened," she said; "I have dreamed something, a
worse dream than any that have gone before--tell me if it is true. Do
not spare me."

And Geoffrey told her all.

When he had finished she spoke again.

"By what shall I swear," she said, "that I am not the thing which you
must think me? Geoffrey, I swear by my love for you that I am
innocent. If I came--oh, the shame of it! if I came--to your room last
night, it was my feet which led me, not my mind that led my feet. I
went to sleep, I was worn out, and then I knew no more till I heard a
dreadful sound, and saw you before me in a blaze of light, after which
there was darkness."

"Oh, Beatrice, do not be distressed," he answered. "I saw that you
were asleep. It is a dreadful thing which has happened, but I do not
think that we were seen."

"I do not know," she said. "Elizabeth looked at me very strangely this
morning, and she sees everything. Geoffrey, for my part, I neither
know nor care. What I do care for is, what must /you/ think of me? You
must believe, oh!--I cannot say it. And yet I am innocent. Never,
never did I dream of this. To come to you--thus--oh, it is shameless!"

"Beatrice, do not talk so. I tell you I know it. Listen--I drew you. I
did not mean that you should come. I did not think that you would
come, but it was my doing. Listen to me, dear," and he told her that
which written words can ill express.

When he had finished, she looked up, with another face; the deep
shadow of her shame had left her. "I believe you, Geoffrey," she said,
"because I know that you have not invented this to shield me, for I
have felt it also. See by it what you are to me. You are my master and
my all. I cannot withstand you if I would. I have little will apart
from yours if you choose to gainsay mine. And now promise me this upon
your word. Leave me uninfluenced; do not draw me to you to be your
ruin. I make no pretence, I have laid my life at your feet, but while
I have any strength to struggle against it, you shall never take it up
unless you can do so to your own honour, and that is not possible. Oh,
my dear, we might have been very happy together, happier than men and
women often are, but it is denied to us. We must carry our cross, we
must crucify the flesh upon it; perhaps so--who can say?--we may
glorify the spirit. I owe you a great deal. I have learnt much from
you, Geoffrey. I have learned to hope again for a Hereafter. Nothing
is left to me now--but that--that and an hour hence--your memory.

"Oh, why should I weep? It is ungrateful, when I have your love, for
which this misery is but a little price to pay. Kiss me, dear, and go
--and never see me more. You will not forget me, I know now that you
will /never/ forget me all your life. Afterwards--perhaps--who can
tell? If not, why then--it will indeed be best--to die."

                  *       *       *       *       *

It is not well to linger over such a scene as this. After all, too, it
is nothing. Only another broken heart or so. The world breaks so many
this way and the other that it can have little pleasure in gloating
over such stale scenes of agony.

Besides we must not let our sympathies carry us away. Geoffrey and
Beatrice deserved all they got; they had no business to put themselves
into such a position. They had defied the customs of their world, and
the world avenged itself upon them and their petty passions. What
happens to the worm that tries to burrow on the highways? Grinding
wheels and crushing feet; these are its portion. Beatrice and Geoffrey
point a moral and adorn a tale. So far as we can see and judge there
was no need for them to have plunged into that ever-running river of
human pain. Let them struggle and drown, and let those who are on the
bank learn wisdom from the sight, and hold out no hand to help them.

Geoffrey drew a ring from his finger and gave it to his love. It was a
common flat-sided silver ring that had been taken from the grave of a
Roman soldier: one peculiarity it had, however; on its inner surface
were roughly cut the words, "ave atque vale." Greeting and farewell!
It was a fitting gift to pass between people in their position.
Beatrice, trembling sorely, whispered that she would wear it on her
heart, upon her hand she could not put it yet awhile--it might be
recognised.

Then thrice did they embrace there upon the desolate shore, once, as
it were, for past joy, once for present pain, and once for future
hope, and parted. There was no talk of after meetings--they felt them
to be impossible, at any rate for many years. How could they meet as
indifferent friends? Too much they loved for that. It was a final
parting, than which death had been less dreadful--for Hope sits ever
by the bed of death--and misery crushed them to the earth.



He left her, and happiness went out of his life as at nightfall the
daylight goes out of the day. Well, at least he had his work to go to.
But Beatrice, poor woman, what had she?

Geoffrey left her. When he had gone some thirty paces he turned again
and gazed his last upon her. There she stood or rather leant, her hand
resting against the wet rock, looking after him with her wide grey
eyes. Even through the drizzling rain he could see the gleam of her
rich hair, the marking of her lovely face, and the carmine of her
lips. She motioned to him to go on. He went, and when he had traversed
a hundred paces looked round once more. She was still there, but now
her face was a blur, and again the great white gull hovered about her
head.

Then the mist swept up and hid her.



Ah, Beatrice, with all your brains you could never learn those simple
principles necessary to the happiness of woman; principles inherited
through a thousand generations of savage and semi-civilized
ancestresses. To accept the situation and the master that situation
brings with it--this is the golden rule of well-being. Not to put out
the hand of your affection further than you can draw it back, this is
another, at least not until you are quite sure that its object is well
within your grasp. If by misfortune, or the anger of the Fates, you
are endowed with those deeper qualities, those extreme capacities of
self-sacrificing affection, such as ruined your happiness, Beatrice,
keep them in stock; do not expose them to the world. The world does
not believe in them; they are inconvenient and undesirable; they are
even immoral. What the world wants, and very rightly, in a person of
your attractiveness is quiet domesticity of character, not the
exhibition of attributes which though they might qualify you for the
rank of heroine in a Greek drama, are nowadays only likely to qualify
you for the reprobation of society.

What? you would rather keep your love, your reprehensible love which
never can be satisfied, and bear its slings and arrows, and die
hugging a shadow to your heart, straining your eyes into the darkness
of that beyond whither you shall go--murmuring with your pale lips
that /there/ you will find reason and fulfilment? Why it is folly.
What ground have you to suppose that you will find anything of the
sort? Go and take the opinion of some scientific person of eminence
upon this infatuation of yours and those vague visions of glory that
shall be. He will explain it clearly enough, will show you that your
love itself is nothing but a natural passion, acting, in your case, on
a singularly sensitive and etherealised organism. Be frank with him,
tell him of your secret hopes. He will smile tenderly, and show you
how those also are an emanation from a craving heart, and the innate
superstitions of mankind. Indeed he will laugh and illustrate the
absurdity of the whole thing by a few pungent examples of what would
happen if these earthly affections could be carried beyond the grave.
Take what you can /now/ will be the burden of his song, and for
goodness' sake do not waste your precious hours in dreams of a To Be.

Beatrice, the world does not want your spirituality. It is not a
spiritual world; it has no clear ideas upon the subject--it pays its
religious premium and works off its aspirations at its weekly church
going, and would think the person a fool who attempted to carry
theories of celestial union into an earthly rule of life. It can
sympathise with Lady Honoria; it can hardly sympathise with /you/.

And yet you will still choose this better part: you will still "live
and love, and lose."

 "With blinding tears and passionate beseeching,
  And outstretched arms through empty silence reaching."

Then, Beatrice, have your will, sow your seed of tears, and take your
chance. You may find that you were right and the worldlings wrong, and
you may reap a harvest beyond the grasp of their poor imaginations.
And if you find that they are right and /you/ are wrong, what will it
matter to you who sleep? For of this at least you are sure. If there
is no future for such earthly love as yours, then indeed there is none
for the children of this world and all their troubling.



                             CHAPTER XXIV

                     LADY HONORIA TAKES THE FIELD

Geoffrey hurried to the Vicarage to fetch his baggage and say good-
bye. He had no time for breakfast, and he was glad of it, for he could
not have eaten a morsel to save his life. He found Elizabeth and her
father in the sitting-room.

"Why, where have you been this wet morning, Mr. Bingham?" said Mr.
Granger.

"I have been for a walk with Miss Beatrice; she is coming home by the
village," he answered. "I don't mind rain, and I wanted to get as much
fresh air as I could before I go back to the mill. Thank you--only a
cup of tea--I will get something to eat as I go."

"How kind of him," reflected Mr. Granger; "no doubt he has been
speaking to Beatrice again about Owen Davies."

"Oh, by the way," he added aloud, "did you happen to hear anybody
moving in the house last night, Mr. Bingham, just when the storm was
at its height? First of all a door slammed so violently that I got up
to see what it was, and as I came down the passage I could almost have
sworn that I saw something white go into the spare room. But my candle
went out and by the time that I had found a light there was nothing to
be seen."

"A clear case of ghosts," said Geoffrey indifferently. It was indeed a
"case of ghosts," and they would, he reflected, haunt him for many a
day.

"How very odd," put in Elizabeth vivaciously, her keen eyes fixed
intently on his face. "Do you know I thought that I twice saw the door
of our room open and shut in the most mysterious fashion. I think that
Beatrice must have something to do with it; she is so uncanny in her
ways."

Geoffrey never moved a muscle, he was trained to keep his countenance.
Only he wondered how much this woman knew. She must be silenced
somehow.

"Excuse me for changing the subject," he said, "but my time is short,
and I have none to spare to hunt the 'Vicarage Ghost.' By the way,
there's a good title for somebody. Mr. Granger, I believe that I may
speak of business matters before Miss Elizabeth?"

"Certainly, Mr. Bingham," said the clergyman; "Elizabeth is my right
hand, and has the best business head in Bryngelly."

Geoffrey thought that this was very evident, and went on. "I only want
to say this. If you get into any further difficulties with your
rascally tithe-payers, mind and let me know. I shall always be glad to
help you while I can. And now I must be going."

He spoke thus for two reasons. First, naturally enough, he meant to
make it his business to protect Beatrice from the pressure of poverty,
and well knew that it would be useless to offer her direct assistance.
Secondly, he wished to show Elizabeth that it would not be to the
advantage of her family to quarrel with him. If she /had/ seen a
ghost, perhaps this fact would make her reticent on the subject. He
did not know that she was playing a much bigger game for her own hand,
a game of which the stakes were thousands a year, and that she was
moreover mad with jealousy and what, in such a woman, must pass for
love.

Elizabeth made no comment on his offer, and before Mr. Granger's
profuse thanks were nearly finished, Geoffrey was gone.



Three weeks passed at Bryngelly, and Elizabeth still held her hand.
Beatrice, pale and spiritless, went about her duties as usual.
Elizabeth never spoke to her in any sense that could awaken her
suspicions, and the ghost story was, or appeared to be, pretty well
forgotten. But at last an event occurred that caused Elizabeth to take
the field. One day she met Owen Davies walking along the beach in the
semi-insane way which he now affected. He stopped, and, without
further ado, plunged into conversation.

"I can't bear it any longer," he said wildly, throwing up his arms. "I
saw her yesterday, and she cut me short before I could speak a word. I
have prayed for patience and it will not come, only a Voice seemed to
say to me that I must wait ten days more, ten short days, and then
Beatrice, my beautiful Beatrice, would be my wife at last."

"If you go on in this way, Mr. Davies," said Elizabeth sharply, her
heart filled with jealous anger, "you will soon be off your head. Are
you not ashamed of yourself for making such a fuss about a girl's
pretty face? If you want to get married, marry somebody else."

"Marry somebody else," he said dreamily; "I don't know anybody else
whom I could marry except you, and you are not Beatrice."

"No," answered Elizabeth angrily, "I should hope that I have more
sense, and if you wanted to marry me you would have to set about it in
a different way from this. I am not Beatrice, thank Heaven, but I am
her sister, and I warn you that I know more about her than you do. As
a friend I warn you to be careful. Supposing that Beatrice were not
worthy of you, you would not wish to marry her, would you?"

Now Owen Davies was at heart somewhat afraid of Elizabeth, like most
other people who had the privilege of her acquaintance. Also, apart
from matters connected with his insane passion, he was very fairly
shrewd. He suspected Elizabeth of something, he did not know of what.

"No, no, of course not," he said. "Of course I would not marry her if
she was not fit to be my wife--but I must know that first, before I
talk of marrying anybody else. Good afternoon, Miss Elizabeth. It will
soon be settled now; it cannot go on much longer now. My prayers will
be answered, I know they will."

"You are right there, Owen Davies," thought Elizabeth, as she looked
after him with ineffable bitterness, not to say contempt. "Your
prayers shall be answered in a way that will astonish you. You shall
not marry Beatrice, and you shall marry /me/. The fish has been on the
line long enough, now I must begin to pull in."

Curiously enough it never really occurred to Elizabeth that Beatrice
herself might prove to be the true obstacle to the marriage she
plotted to prevent. She knew that her sister was fond of Geoffrey
Bingham, but, when it came to the point that she would absolutely
allow her affection to interfere with so glorious a success in life,
she never believed for one moment. Of course she thought it was
possible that if Beatrice could get possession of Geoffrey she might
prefer to do so, but failing him, judging from her own low and vulgar
standard, Elizabeth was convinced that she would take Owen. It did not
seem possible that what was so precious in her own eyes might be
valueless and even hateful to those of her sister. As for that little
midnight incident, well, it was one thing and marriage was another.
People forget such events when they marry; sometimes even they marry
in order to forget them.

Yes, she must strike, but how? Elizabeth had feelings like other
people. She did not mind ruining her sister and rival, but she would
very much prefer it should not be known that hers was the hand to cut
her down. Of course, if the worst came to the worst, she must do it.
Meanwhile, might not a substitute be found--somebody in whom the act
would seem not one of vengeance, but of virtue? Ah! she had it: Lady
Honoria! Who could be better for such a purpose than the cruelly
injured wife? But then how should she communicate the facts to her
ladyship without involving herself? Again she hit upon a device much
favoured by such people--"un vieux truc mais toujours bon"--the
pristine one of an anonymous letter, which has the startling merit of
not committing anybody to anything. An anonymous letter, to all
appearance written by a servant: it was the very thing! Most likely it
would result in a searching inquiry by Lady Honoria, in which event
Elizabeth, of course against her will, would be forced to say what she
knew; almost certainly it would result in a quarrel between husband
and wife, which might induce the former to show his hand, or even to
take some open step as regards Beatrice. She was sorry for Geoffrey,
against whom she had no ill feeling, but it could not be helped; he
must be sacrificed.

That very evening she wrote her letter and sent it to be posted by an
old servant living in London. It was a master-piece in its way,
especially phonetically. This precious epistle, which was most
exceedingly ill writ in a large coarse hand, ran thus:

 "My Ladi,--My consence druvs me to it, much again my will. I've
  tried hard, my ladi, not to speek, first acorse of miss B. as i
  heve knowed good and peur and also for the sakes of your evil
  usband that wulf in scheeps cloathin. But when i think on you my
  ladi a lorful legel wife gud and virtus and peur and of the things
  as i hev seen which is enuf to bring a blush to the face of a
  stater, I knows it is my holy dooty to rite your ladishipp as
  follers. Your ladishipp forgif me but on the nite of whittsundey
  last Miss B. Grainger wint after midnite inter the room of your
  bad usband--as I was to mi sham ther to se. Afterward more nor an
  hour, she cum out ain being carred /in his harmes/. And if your
  ladishipp dont believ me, let your ladishipp rite to miss
  elizbeth, as had this same misfortune to see as your tru frend,

                                                        "The Riter."

In due course this charming communication reached Lady Honoria,
bearing a London post-mark. She read and re-read it, and soon mastered
its meaning. Then, after a night's thought, she took the "Riter's"
advice and wrote to Elizabeth, sending her a copy of the letter (her
own), vehemently repudiating all belief in it, and asking for a reply
that should dissipate this foul slander from her mind for ever.

The answer came by return. It was short and artful.

 "Dear Lady Honoria Bingham," it ran, "you must forgive me if I
  decline to answer the questions in your letter. You will easily
  understand that between a desire to preserve a sister's reputation
  and an incapacity (to be appreciated by every Christian) to speak
  other than the truth--it is possible for a person to be placed in
  the most cruel of positions--a position which I am sure will
  command even your sympathy, though under such circumstances I have
  little right to expect any from a wife believing herself to have
  been cruelly wronged. Let me add that nothing short of the
  compulsion of a court of law will suffice to unseal my lips as to
  the details of the circumstances (which are, I trust,
  misunderstood) alluded to in the malicious anonymous letter of
  which you inclose a copy."

That very evening, as the Fates would have it, Lady Honoria and her
husband had a quarrel. As usual, it was about Effie, for on most other
subjects they preserved an armed neutrality. Its details need not be
entered into, but at last Geoffrey, who was in a sadly irritable
condition of mind, fairly lost his temper.

"The fact is," he said, "that you are not fit to look after the child.
You only think of yourself, Honoria."

She turned on him with a dangerous look upon her cold and handsome
face.

"Be careful what you say, Geoffrey. It is you who are not fit to have
charge of Effie. Be careful lest I take her away from you altogether,
as I can if I like."

"What do you mean by that threat?" he asked.

"Do you want to know? Then I will tell you. I understand enough law to
be aware that a wife can get a separation from an unfaithful husband,
and what is more, can take away his children."

"Again I ask what you mean," said Geoffrey, turning cold with anger.

"I mean this, Geoffrey. That Welsh girl is your mistress. She passed
the night of Whit-Sunday in your room, and was carried from it in your
arms."

"It is a lie," he said; "she is nothing of the sort. I do not know who
gave you this information, but it is a slanderous lie, and somebody
shall suffer for it."

"Nobody will suffer for it, Geoffrey, because you will not dare to
stir the matter up--for the girl's sake if not for your own. Can you
deny that you were seen carrying her in your arms from your room on
Whit-Sunday night? Can you deny that you are in love with her?"

"And supposing that I am in love with her, is it to be wondered at,
seeing how you treat me and have treated me for years?" he answered
furiously. "It is utterly false to say that she is my mistress."

"You have not answered my question," said Lady Honoria with a smile of
triumph. "Were you seen carrying that woman in your arms and from your
room at the dead of night? Of course it meant nothing, nothing at all.
Who would dare to asperse the character of this perfect, lovely, and
intellectual schoolmistress? I am not jealous, Geoffrey----"

"I should think not, Honoria, seeing how things are."

"I am not jealous, I repeat, but please understand that I will not
have this go on, in your own interests and mine. Why, what a fool you
must be. Don't you know that a man who has risen, as you have, has a
hundred enemies ready to spring on him like a pack of wolves and tear
him to pieces? Why many even of those who fawn upon you and flatter
you to your face, hate you bitterly in secret, because you have
succeeded where they have failed. Don't you know also that there are
papers here in London which would give hundreds of pounds for the
chance of publishing such a scandal as this, especially against a
powerful political opponent. Let it once come out that this obscure
girl is your mistress----"

"Honoria, I tell you she is nothing of the sort. It is true I carried
her from my room in a fainting fit, but she came there in her sleep."

Lady Honoria laughed. "Really, Geoffrey, I wonder that you think it
worth while to tell me such nonsense. Keep it for the divorce court,
if ever we get there, and see what a jury says to it. Look here; be
sensible. I am not a moralist, and I am not going to play the outraged
wife unless you force me to it. I do not mean to take any further
notice of this interesting little tale as against you. But if you go
on with it, beware! I will not be made to look a fool. If you are
going to be ruined you can be ruined by yourself. I warn you frankly,
that at the first sign of it, I shall put myself in the right by
commencing proceedings against you. Now, of course, I know this, that
in the event of a smash, you would be glad enough to be rid of me in
order that you might welcome your dear Beatrice in my place. But there
are two things to remember: first, that you could not marry her,
supposing you to be idiot enough to wish to do so, because I should
only get a judicial separation, and you would still have to support
me. Secondly, if I go, Effie goes with me, for I have a right to claim
her at law; and that fact, my dear Geoffrey, makes me mistress of the
situation, because I do not suppose that you would part with Effie
even for the sake of Miss Beatrice. And now I will leave you to think
it over."

And with a little nod she sailed out of the room, completely
victorious. She was indeed, reflected Geoffrey, "mistress of the
situation." Supposing that she brought a suit against him where would
he be? She must have evidence, or she would not have known the story.
The whole drama had clearly been witnessed by someone, probably either
by Elizabeth or the servant girl, and that some one had betrayed it to
Honoria and possibly to others. The thought made him sick. He was a
man of the world, and a practical lawyer, and though, indeed, they
were innocent, he knew that under the circumstances few would be found
to believe it. At the very best there must be a terrible and shocking
scandal, and Beatrice would lose her good name. He placed himself in
the position of counsel for the petitioner in a like case, and thought
how he would crush and crumple such a defence in his address to the
jury. A probable tale forsooth!

Undoubtedly, too, Honoria would be acting wisely from her point of
view. Public sympathy would be with her throughout. He knew that, as
it was, he was believed generally to owe much of his success to his
handsome and high-born wife. Now it would be said that he had used her
as a ladder and then thrown her over. With all this, however, he might
cope; he could even bear with the vulgar attacks of a vulgar press,
and the gibes and jeers of his political and personal enemies, but to
lose Effie he could not bear. And if such a case were brought against
him it was almost certain that he would lose her, for, if he was
worsted, custody of the child would be given to the injured wife.

Then there was Beatrice to be considered. The same malicious tongue
that had revealed this matter to Honoria would probably reveal it to
the rest of the world, and even if he escaped the worst penalties of
outraged morality, they would certainly be wreaked upon her.
Beatrice's reputation would be blasted, her employment lost, and her
life made a burden to her. Yes, decidedly, Honoria had the best of the
position; decidedly, also, she spoke words of weight and common sense.

What was to be done? Was there no way out of it? All that night as
Geoffrey sat in the House, his arms folded on his breast, and to
appearance intently listening to the long harangues of the Opposition,
this question haunted him. He argued the situation out this way and
that way, till at the last he came to a conclusion. Either he must
wait for the scandal to leak out, let Beatrice be ruined, and direct
his efforts to the softening of Honoria, and generally to self-
preservation, or he must take the bull by the horns, must abandon his
great career and his country and seek refuge in another land, say
America, taking Beatrice and Effie with him. Once the child was out of
the jurisdiction, of course no court could force her from him.

Of the two courses, even in so far as he himself was concerned, what
between the urgency of the matter and the unceasing pressure of his
passion, Geoffrey inclined to the latter. The relations between
himself and Honoria had for years been so strained, so totally
different from those which should exist between man and wife, that
they greatly mitigated in his mind the apparent iniquity of such a
step. Nor would he feel much compunction at removing the child from
her mother, for there was no love lost between the two, and as time
went on he guessed shrewdly there would be less and less. For the
rest, he had some seventeen thousand pounds in hand; he would take
half and leave Honoria half. He knew that he could always earn a
living wherever he went, and probably much more than a living, and of
whatever he earned a strict moiety should be paid to Honoria. But
first and above everything, there was Beatrice to be considered. She
must be saved, even if he ruined himself to save her.

Lady Honoria, it is scarcely necessary to say, had little idea that
she was driving her husband to such dangerous and determined councils.
She wanted to frighten Geoffrey, not to lose him and all he meant to
her; this was the last thing that she would wish to do. She did not
greatly care about the Beatrice incident, but her shrewd common sense
told her that it might well be used as an engine to ruin them all.
Therefore she spoke as she did speak, though in reality matters would
have to be bad indeed before she sought the aid of a court of law,
where many things concerning herself might come to the light of day
which she would prefer to leave in darkness.

Nor did she stop here; she determined to attack Geoffrey's position in
another way, namely, through Beatrice herself. For a long time Honoria
hesitated as to the method of this attack. She had some knowledge of
the world and of character, and from what she knew of Beatrice she
came to the sound conclusion that she was not a woman to be
threatened, but rather one to be appealed to. So after much thought
she wrote to her thus:--

 "A story, which I still hesitate to believe, has come to me by
  means of anonymous letters, as to your conduct with my husband. I
  do not wish to repeat it now, further than to say that, if true,
  it establishes circumstances which leave no doubt as to the
  existence of relations so intimate between you as to amount to
  guilt. It may not be true or it may, in which latter event I wish
  to say this: With your morality I have nothing to do; it is your
  affair. Nor do I wish to plead to you as an injured wife or to
  reproach you, for there are things too wicked for mere reproach.
  But I will say this: if the story is true, I must presume that you
  have some affection for the partner of your shame. I put myself
  out of the question, and in the name of that affection, however
  guilty it may be, I ask you to push matters no further. To do so
  will be to bring its object to utter ruin. /If you care for him,
  sever all connection with him utterly and for ever./ Otherwise he
  will live to curse and hate you. Should you neglect this advice,
  and should the facts that I have heard become public property, I
  warn you, as I have already warned him, that in self-preservation
  and for the sake of self-respect, I shall be forced to appeal to
  the law for my remedy. Remember that his career is at stake, and
  that in losing it and me he will lose also his child. Remember
  that if this comes about it will be through /you/. Do not answer
  this, it will do no good, for I shall naturally put no faith in
  your protestations, but if you are in any way or measure guilty of
  this offence, appealing to you as one woman to another, and for
  the sake of the man who is dear to both, I say do your best to
  redeem the evil, /by making all further communication between
  yourself and him an impossibility/.                        H.B."

It was a clever letter; Lady Honoria could not have devised one more
powerful to work on a woman like Beatrice. The same post that took it
to her took another from Geoffrey himself. It was long, though
guarded, and need not be quoted in its entirety, but it put the whole
position before her in somewhat veiled language, and ended by saying,
"Marriage I cannot give you, only life-long love. In other
circumstances to offer this would be an insult, but if things should
be as a I fear, it is worth your consideration. I do not say to you
/come/, I say come /if you wish/. No, Beatrice, I will not put this
cruel burden of decision upon you. I say /come!/ I do not command you
to come, because I promised to leave you uninfluenced. But I pray you
to do so. Let us put an end to this wretchedness, and count the world
well lost as our price of love. Come, dearest Beatrice--to leave me no
more till death. I put my life in your hands; if you take it up,
whatever trouble you may have to face, you will never lose my
affection or esteem. Do not think of me, think of yourself. You have
given me your love as you once gave me my life. I owe something in
return; I cannot see you shamed and make no offer of reparation.
Indeed, so far as I am concerned, I shall think all I lose as nothing
compared to what I gain in gaining you. Will you come? If so, we will
leave this country and begin afresh elsewhere. After all, it matters
little, and will matter less when everything is said and done. My life
has for years been but as an unwholesome dream. The one real thing,
the one happy thing that I have found in it has been our love. Do not
let us throw it away, Beatrice."

By return of post he received this answer written in pencil.

 "No, dear Geoffrey. Things must take their course.--B."

That was all.



                             CHAPTER XXV

                      ELIZABETH SHOWS HER TEETH

Hard had been Beatrice's hours since that grey morning of separation.
She must bear all the inner wretchedness of her lot; she must conceal
her grief, must suffer the slings and arrows of Elizabeth's sharp
tongue, and strive to keep Owen Davies at a distance. Indeed, as the
days went on, this last task grew more and more portentous. The man
was quite unmanageable; his passion, which was humiliating and hateful
to Beatrice, became the talk of the place. Everybody knew of it,
except her father, and even his eyes began to be opened.

One night--it was the same upon which Geoffrey and Honoria
respectively had posted their letters to Beatrice--anybody looking
into the little room at Bryngelly Castle, which served its owner for
all purposes except that of sleeping, would have witnessed a very
strange sight. Owen Davies was walking to and fro--walking rapidly
with wild eyes and dishevelled hair. At the turn of each length of the
apartment he would halt, and throwing his arms into the air ejaculate:

"Oh, God, hear me, and give me my desire! Oh, God, answer me!"

For two long hours thus he walked and thus cried aloud, till at length
he sank panting and exhausted into a chair. Suddenly he raised his
head, and appeared to listen intently.

"The Voice," he said aloud; "the Voice again. What does it say?
To-morrow, to-morrow I must speak; and I shall win her."

He sprang up with a shout, and once more began his wild march. "Oh,
Beatrice!" he said, "to-morrow you will promise to marry me; the Voice
says so, and soon, soon, perhaps in one short month, you will be my
own--mine only! Geoffrey Bingham shall not come between us then, for I
will watch you day and night. You shall be my very, very own--my own
beautiful Beatrice," and he stretched out his arms and clasped at the
empty air--a crazy and unpleasant sight to see.

And so he walked and spoke till the dawn was grey in the east. This
occurred on the Friday night. It was on the following morning that
Beatrice, the unfortunate and innocent object of these amorous
invocations, received the two letters. She had gone to the post-office
on her way to the school, on the chance of there being a note from
Geoffrey. Poor woman, his letters were the one bright thing in her
life. From motives of prudence they were written in the usual semi-
formal style, but she was quick to read between the lines, and,
moreover, they came from his dear hand.

There was the letter sure enough, and another in a woman's writing.
She recognised the hand as that of Lady Honoria, which she had often
seen on envelopes directed to Geoffrey, and a thrill of fear shot
through her. She took the letters, and walking as quickly as she could
to the school, locked herself in her own little room, for it was not
yet nine o'clock, and looked at them with a gathering terror. What was
in them? Why did Lady Honoria write to her? Which should she read
first? In a moment Beatrice had made up her mind. She would face the
worst at once. With a set face she opened Lady Honoria's letter,
unfolded it, and read. We already know its contents. As her mind
grasped them her lips grew ashy white, and by the time that the
horrible thing was done she was nigh to fainting.

Anonymous letters! oh, who could have done this cruel thing?
Elizabeth, it must be Elizabeth, who saw everything, and thus stabbed
her in the back. Was it possible that her own sister could treat her
so? She knew that Elizabeth disliked her; she could never fathom the
cause, still she knew the fact. But if this were her doing, then she
must hate her, and most bitterly; and what had she done to earn such
hate? And now Geoffrey was in danger on her account, danger of ruin,
and how could she prevent it? This was her first idea. Most people
might have turned to their own position and been content to leave
their lover to fight his own battle. But Beatrice thought little of
herself. He was in danger, and how could she protect him? Why here in
the letter was the answer! "If you care for him sever all connection
with him utterly, and for ever. Otherwise, he will live to curse and
hate you." No, no! Geoffrey would never do that. But Lady Honoria was
quite right; in his interest, for his sake, she must sever all
connection with him--sever it utterly and for ever. But how--how?

She thrust the letter into her dress--a viper would have been a more
welcome guest--and opened Geoffrey's.

It told the same tale, but offered a different solution. The tears
started to her eyes as she read his offer to take her to him for good
and all, and go away with her to begin life afresh. It seemed a
wonderful thing to Beatrice that he should be willing to sacrifice so
much upon such a worthless altar as her love--a wonderful and most
generous thing. She pressed the senseless paper to her heart, then
kissed it again and again. But she never thought of yielding to this
great temptation, never for one second. He prayed her to come, but
that she would not do while her will remained. What, /she/ bring
Geoffrey to ruin? No, she had rather starve in the streets or perish
by slow torture. How could he ever think that she would consent to
such a scheme? Indeed she never would; she had brought enough trouble
on him already. But oh, she blessed him for that letter. How deeply
must he love her when he could offer to do this for her sake!

Hark! the children were waiting; she must go and teach. The letter,
Geoffrey's dear letter, could be answered in the afternoon. So she
thrust it in her breast with the other, but closer to her heart, and
went.



That afternoon as Mr. Granger, in a happy frame of mind--for were not
his debts paid, and had he not found a most convenient way of
providing against future embarrassment?--was engaged peaceably in
contemplating his stock over the gate of his little farm buildings, he
was much astonished suddenly to discover Owen Davies at his elbow.

"How do you do, Mr. Davies?" he said; "how quietly you must have
come."

"Yes," answered Owen absently. "The fact is, I have followed you
because I want to speak to you alone--quite alone."

"Indeed, Mr. Davies--well, I am at your service. What is wrong? You
don't look very well."

"Oh, I am quite well, thank you. I never was better; and there's
nothing wrong, nothing at all. Everything is going to be bright now, I
know that full surely."

"Indeed," said Mr. Granger, again looking at him with a puzzled air,
"and what may you want to see me about? Not but what I am always at
your service, as you know," he added apologetically.

"This," he answered, suddenly seizing the clergyman by the coat in a
way that made him start.

"What--my coat, do you mean?"

"Don't be so foolish, Mr. Granger. No, about Beatrice."

"Oh. indeed, Mr. Davies. Nothing wrong at the school, I hope? I think
that she does her duties to the satisfaction of the committee, though
I admit that the arithmetic----"

"No! no, no! It is not about the school. I don't wish her to go to the
school any more. I love her, Mr. Granger, I love her dearly, and I
want to marry her."

The old man flushed with pleasure. Was it possible? Did he hear
aright? Owen Davies, the richest man in that part of Wales, wanted to
marry his daughter, who had nothing but her beauty. It must be too
good to be true!

"I am indeed flattered," he said. "It is more than she could expect--
not but what Beatrice is very good-looking and very clever," he added
hastily, fearing lest he was detracting from his daughter's market
value.

"Good-looking--clever; she is an angel," murmured Owen.

"Oh, yes, of course she is," said her father, "that is, if a woman--
yes, of course--and what is more, I think she's very fond of you. I
think she is pining for you. I've though so for a long time."

"Is she?" said Owen anxiously. "Then all I have to say is that she
takes a very curious way of showing it. She won't say a word to me;
she puts me off on every occasion. But it will be all right now--all
right now."

"Oh, there, there, Mr. Davies, maids will be maids until they are
wives. We know about all that," said Mr. Granger sententiously.

His would-be son-in-law looked as though he knew very little about it
indeed, although the inference was sufficiently obvious.

"Mr. Granger," he said, seizing his hand, "I want to make Beatrice my
wife--I do indeed."

"Well, I did not suppose otherwise, Mr. Davies."

"If you help me in this I will do whatever you like as to money
matters and that sort of thing, you know. She shall have as fine a
settlement as any woman in Wales. I know that goes a long way with a
father, and I shall raise no difficulties."

"Very right and proper, I am sure," said Mr. Granger, adopting a
loftier tone as he discovered the advantages of his position. "But of
course on such matters I shall take the advice of a lawyer. I daresay
that Mr. Bingham would advise me," he added, "as a friend of the
family, you know. He is a very clever lawyer, and, besides, he
wouldn't charge anything."

"Oh, no, not Mr. Bingham," answered Owen anxiously. "I will do
anything you like, or if you wish to have a lawyer I'll pay the bill
myself. But never mind about that now. Let us settle it with Beatrice
first. Come along at once."

"Eh, but hadn't you better arrange that part of the business
privately?"

"No, no. She always snubs me when I try to speak to her alone. You had
better be there, and Miss Elizabeth too, if she likes. I won't speak
to her again alone. I will speak to her in the face of God and man, as
God directed me to do, and then it will be all right--I know it will."

Mr. Granger stared at him. He was a clergyman of a very practical
sort, and did not quite see what the Power above had to do with Owen
Davies's matrimonial intentions.

"Ah, well," he said, "I see what you mean; marriages are made in
heaven; yes, of course. Well, if you want to get on with the matter, I
daresay that we shall find Beatrice in."

So they walked back to the Vicarage, Mr. Granger exultant and yet
perplexed, for it struck him that there was something a little odd
about the proceeding, and Owen Davies in silence or muttering
occasionally to himself.

In the sitting-room they found Elizabeth.

"Where is Beatrice?" asked her father.

"I don't know," she answered, and at that moment Beatrice, pale and
troubled, walked into the room, like a lamb to the slaughter.

"Ah, Beatrice," said her father, "we were just asking for you."

She glanced round, and with the quick wit of a human animal, instantly
perceived that some new danger threatened her.

"Indeed," she said, sinking into a chair in an access of feebleness
born of fear. "What is it, father?"

Mr. Granger looked at Owen Davies and then took a step towards the
door. It struck him forcibly that this scene should be private to the
two persons principally concerned.

"Don't go," said Owen Davies excitedly, "don't go, either of you; what
I have to say had better be said before you both. I should like to say
it before the whole world; to cry it from the mountain tops."

Elizabeth glared at him fiercely--glared first at him and then at the
innocent Beatrice. Could he be going to propose to her, then? Ah, why
had she hesitated? Why had she not told him the whole truth before?
But the heart of Beatrice, who sat momentarily expecting to be
publicly denounced, grew ever fainter. The waters of desolation were
closing in over her soul.

Mr. Granger sat down firmly and worked himself into the seat of his
chair, as though to secure an additional fixedness of tenure.
Elizabeth set her teeth, and leaned her elbow on the table, holding
her hand so as to shade her face. Beatrice drooped upon her seat like
a fading lily, or a prisoner in the dock. She was opposite to them,
and Owen Davies, his face alight with wild enthusiasm, stood up and
addressed them all like the counsel for the prosecution.

"Last autumn," he began, speaking to Mr. Granger, who might have been
a judge uncertain as to the merits of the case, "I asked your daughter
Beatrice to marry me."

Beatrice gave a sigh, and collected her scattered energies. The storm
had burst at last, and she must face it.

"I asked her to marry me, and she told me to wait a year. I have
waited as long as I could, but I could not wait the whole year. I have
prayed a great deal, and I am bidden to speak."

Elizabeth made a gesture of impatience. She was a person of strong
common sense, and this mixture of religion and eroticism disgusted
her. She also know that the storm had burst, and that /she/ must face
it.

"So I come to tell you that I love your daughter Beatrice, and want to
make her my wife. I have never loved anybody else, but I have loved
her for years; and I ask your consent."

"Very flattering, very flattering, I am sure, especially in these hard
times," said Mr. Granger apologetically, shaking his thin hair down
over his forehead, and then rumpling it up again. "But you see, Mr.
Davies, you don't want to marry me" (here Beatrice smiled faintly)--
"you want to marry my daughter, so you had better ask her direct--at
least I suppose so."

Elizabeth made a movement as though to speak, then changed her mind
and listened.

"Beatrice," said Owen Davies, "you hear. I ask you to marry me."

There was a pause. Beatrice, who had sat quite silent, was gathering
up her strength to answer. Elizabeth, watching her from beneath her
hand, thought that she read upon her face irresolution, softening into
consent. What she really saw was but doubt as to the fittest and most
certain manner of refusal. Like lightning it flashed into Elizabeth's
mind that she must strike now, or hold her hand for ever. If once
Beatrice spoke that fatal "yes," her revelations might be of no avail.
And Beatrice would speak it; she was sure she would. It was a golden
road out of her troubles.

"Stop!" said Elizabeth in a shrill, hard voice. "Stop! I must speak;
it is my duty as a Christian. I must tell the truth. I cannot allow an
honest man to be deceived."

There was an awful pause. Beatrice broke it. Now she saw all the
truth, and knew what was at hand. She placed her hand upon her heart
to still its beating.

"Oh, Elizabeth," she said, "in our dead mother's name----" and she
stopped.

"Yes," answered her sister, "in our dead mother's name, which you have
dishonoured, I will do it. Listen, Owen Davies, and father: Beatrice,
who sits there"--and she pointed at her with her thin hand--"/Beatrice
is a scarlet woman!/"

"I really don't understand," gasped Mr. Granger, while Owen looked
round wildly, and Beatrice sunk her head upon her breast.

"Then I will explain," said Elizabeth, still pointing at her sister.
"She is Geoffrey Bingham's /mistress/. On the night of Whit-Sunday
last she rose from bed and went into his room at one in the morning. I
saw her with my own eyes. Afterwards she was brought back to her bed
in his arms--I saw it with my own eyes, and I heard him kiss her."
(This was a piece of embroidery on Elizabeth's part.) "She is his
lover, and has been in love with him for months. I tell you this, Owen
Davies, because, though I cannot bear to bring disgrace upon our name
and to defile my lips with such a tale, neither can I bear that you
should marry a girl, believing her to be good, when she is what
Beatrice is."

"Then I wish to God that you had held your wicked tongue," said Mr.
Granger fiercely.

"No, father. I have a duty to perform, and I will perform it at any
cost, and however much it pains me. You know that what I say is true.
You heard the noise on the night of Whit-Sunday, and got up to see
what it was. You saw the white figure in the passage--it was Geoffrey
Bingham with Beatrice in his arms. Ah! well may she hang her head. Let
her deny if it she can. Let her deny that she loves him to her shame,
and that she was alone in his room on that night."

Then Beatrice rose and spoke. She was pale as death and more beautiful
in her shame and her despair than ever she had been before; her
glorious eyes shone, and there were deep black lines beneath them.

"My heart is my own," she said, "and I will make no answer to you
about it. Think what you will. For the rest, it is not true. I am not
what Elizabeth tells you that I am. I am /not/ Geoffrey Bingham's
mistress. It is true that I was in his room that night, and it is true
that he carried me back to my own. But it was in my sleep that I went
there, not of my own free will. I awoke there, and fainted when I
woke, and then at once he bore me back."

Elizabeth laughed shrill and loud--it sounded like the cackle of a
fiend.

"In her sleep," she said; "oh, she went there in her sleep!"

"Yes, Elizabeth, in my sleep. You do not believe me, but it is true.
You do not wish to believe me. You wish to bring the sister whom you
should love, who has never offended against you by act or word, to
utter disgrace and ruin. In your cowardly spite you have written
anonymous letters to Lady Honoria Bingham, to prevail upon her to
strike the blow that should destroy her husband and myself, and when
you fear that this has failed, you come forward and openly accuse us.
You do this in the name of Christian duty; in the name of love and
charity, you believe the worst, and seek to ruin us. Shame on you,
Elizabeth! shame on you! and may the same measure that you have meted
out to me never be paid back to you. We are no longer sisters.
Whatever happens, I have done with you. Go your ways."

Elizabeth shrank and quailed beneath her sister's scorn. Even her
venomous hatred could not bear up against the flash of those royal
eyes, and the majesty of that outraged innocence. She gasped and bit
her lip till the blood started, but she said nothing.

Then Beatrice turned to her father, and spoke in another and a
pleading voice, stretching out her arms towards him.

"Oh, father," she said, "at least tell me that /you/ believe me.
Though you may think that I might love to all extremes, surely, having
known me so many years, you cannot think that I would lie even for my
love's sake."

The old man looked wildly round, and shook his head.

"In his room and in his arms," he said. "I saw it, it seems. You, too,
who have never been known to walk in your sleep from a child; and you
will not say that you do not love him--the scoundrel. It is wicked of
Elizabeth--jealousy bitter as the grave. It is wicked of her to tell
the tale; but as it is told, how can I say that I do not believe it?"

Then Beatrice, her cup being full, once more dropped her head, and
turned to go.

"Stop," said Owen Davies in a hoarse voice, and speaking for the first
time. "Hear what /I/ have to say."

She lifted her eyes. "With you, Mr. Davies, I have nothing to do; I am
not answerable to you. Go and help your accomplice," and she pointed
to Elizabeth, "to cry this scandal over the whole world."

"Stop," he said again. "I will speak. I believe that it is true. I
believe that you are Geoffrey Bingham's mistress, curse him! but I do
not care. I am still willing to marry you."

Elizabeth gasped. Was this to be the end of her scheming? Would the
blind passion of this madman prevail over her revelations, and
Beatrice still become his rich and honoured wife, while she was left
poor and disgraced? Oh, it was monstrous! Oh, she had never dreamed of
this!"

"Noble, noble!" murmured Mr. Granger; "noble! God bless you!"

So the position was not altogether beyond recovery. His erring
daughter might still be splendidly married; he might still look
forward to peace and wealth in his old age.

Only Beatrice smiled faintly.

"I thank you," she said. "I am much honoured, but I could never have
married you because I do not love you. You must understand me very
little if you think that I should be the more ready to do so on
account of the danger in which I stand," and she ceased.

"Listen, Beatrice," Owen went on, an evil light shining on his heavy
face, while Elizabeth sat astounded, scarcely able to believe her
ears. "I want you, and I mean to marry you; you are more to me than
all the world. I can give you everything, and you had better yield to
me, and you shall hear no more of this. But if you won't, then this is
what I will do. I will be revenged upon you--terribly revenged."

Beatrice shook her head and smiled again, as though to bid him do his
worst.

"And look, Beatrice," he went on, waxing almost eloquent in his
jealous despair, "I have another argument to urge on you. I will not
only be revenged on you, I will be revenged upon your lover--on this
Geoffrey Bingham."

"/Oh!/" said Beatrice sharply, like one in pain. He had found the way
to move her now, and with the cunning of semi-madness he drove the
point home.

"Yes, you may start--I will. I tell you that I will never rest till I
have ruined him, and I am rich and can do it. I have a hundred
thousand pounds, that I will spend on doing it. I have nothing to
fear, except an action for libel. Oh, I am not a fool, though you
think I am, I know. Well, I can pay for a dozen actions. There are
papers in London that will be glad to publish all this--yes, the whole
story--with plans and pictures too. Just think, Beatrice, what it will
be when all England--yes, and all the world--is gloating over your
shame, and half-a-dozen prints are using the thing for party purposes,
clamouring for the disgrace of the man who ruined you, and whom you
will ruin. He has a fine career; it shall be utterly destroyed. By
God! I will hunt him to his grave, unless you promise to marry me,
Beatrice. Do that, and not a word of this shall be said. Now answer."

Mr. Granger sank back in his chair; this savage play of human passions
was altogether beyond his experience--it overwhelmed him. As for
Elizabeth, she bit her thin fingers, and glared from one to the other.
"He reckons without me," she thought. "He reckons without me--I will
marry him yet."

But Beatrice leant for a moment against the wall and shut her eyes to
think. Oh, she saw it all--the great posters with her name and
Geoffrey's on them, the shameless pictures of her in his arms, the
sickening details, the letters of the outraged matrons, the "Mothers
of ten," and the moral-minded colonels--all, all! She heard the
prurient scream of every male Elizabeth in England; the allusions in
the House--the jeers, the bitter attacks of enemies and rivals. Then
Lady Honoria would begin her suit, and it would all be dragged up
afresh, and Geoffrey's fault would be on every lip, till he was
/ruined/. For herself she did not care; but could she bring this on
one whose only crime was that she had learned to love him? No, no; but
neither could she marry this hateful man. And yet what escape was
there? She flung herself upon her woman's wit, and it did not fail
her. In a few seconds she had thought it all out and made up her mind.

"How can I answer you at a moment's notice, Mr. Davies?" she said. "I
must have time to think it over. To threaten such revenge upon me is
not manly, but I know that you love me, and therefore I excuse it.
Still, I must have time. I am confused."

"What, another year? No, no," he said. "You must answer."

"I do not ask a year or a month. I only ask for one week. If you will
not give me that, then I will defy you, and you may do your worst. I
cannot answer now."

This was a bold stroke, but it told. Mr. Davies hesitated.

"Give the girl a week," said her father to him. "She is not herself."

"Very well; one week, no more," said he.

"I have another stipulation to make," said Beatrice, "You are all to
swear to me that for that week no word of this will pass your mouths;
that for that week I shall not be annoyed or interfered with, or
spoken to on the subject, not by one of you. If at the end of it I
still refuse to accept your terms, you can do your worst, but till
then you must hold your hand."

Owen Davies hesitated; he was suspicious.

"Remember," Beatrice went on, raising her voice, "I am a desperate
woman. I may turn at bay, and do something which you do not expect,
and that will be very little to the advantage of any of you. Do you
swear?"

"Yes," said Owen Davies.

Then Beatrice looked at Elizabeth, and Elizabeth looked at her. She
saw that the matter had taken a new form. She saw what her jealous
folly had hitherto hidden from her--that Beatrice did not mean to
marry Owen Davies, that she was merely gaining time to execute some
purpose of her own. What this might be Elizabeth cared little so that
it did not utterly extinguish chances that at the moment seemed faint
enough. She did not want to push matters against her sister, or her
lover Geoffrey, beyond the boundary of her own interests. Beatrice
should have her week, and be free from all interference so far as she
was concerned. She realised now that it was too late how great had
been her error. Oh, if only she had sought Beatrice's confidence at
first! But it had seemed to her impossible that she would really throw
away such an opportunity in life.

"Certainly I promise, Beatrice," she said mildly. "I do not swear, for
'swear not at all,' you know. I only did what I thought my duty in
warning Mr. Davies. If he chooses to go on with the matter, it is no
affair of mine. I had no wish to hurt you, or Mr. Bingham. I acted
solely from my religious convictions."

"Oh, stop talking religion, Elizabeth, and practise it a little more!"
said her father, for once in his life stirred out of his feeble
selfishness. "We have all undertaken to keep our mouths sealed for
this week."

Then Beatrice left the room, and after her went Owen Davies without
another word.

"Elizabeth," said her father, rising, "you are a wicked woman! What
did you do this for?"

"Do you want to know, father?" she said coolly; "then I will tell you.
Because I mean to marry Owen Davies myself. We must all look after
ourselves in this world, you know; and that is a maxim which you never
forget, for one. I mean to marry him; and though I seem to have
failed, marry him I will, yet! And now you know all about it; and if
you are not a fool, you will hold your tongue and let me be!" and she
went also, leaving him alone.

Mr. Granger held up his hands in astonishment. He was a selfish,
money-seeking old man, but he felt that he did not deserve to have
such a daughter as this.



                             CHAPTER XXVI

                         WHAT BEATRICE SWORE

Beatrice went to her room, but the atmosphere of the place seemed to
stifle her. Her brain was reeling, she must go out into the air--away
from her tormentors. She had not yet answered Geoffrey's letter, and
it must be answered by this post, for there was none on Sunday. It was
half-past four--the post went out at five; if she was going to write,
she should do so at once, but she could not do so here. Besides, she
must find time for thought. Ah, she had it; she would take her canoe
and paddle across the bay to the little town of Coed and write her
letter there. The post did not leave Coed till half-past six. She put
on her hat and jacket, and taking a stamp, a sheet of paper, and an
envelope with her, slipped quietly from the house down to old Edward's
boat-house where the canoe was kept. Old Edward was not there himself,
but his son was, a boy of fourteen, and by his help Beatrice was soon
safely launched. The sea glittered like glass, and turning southwards,
presently she was paddling round the shore of the island on which the
Castle stood towards the open bay.

As she paddled her mind cleared, and she was able to consider the
position. It was bad enough. She saw no light, darkness hemmed her in.
But at least she had a week before her, and meanwhile what should she
write to Geoffrey?

Then, as she thought, a great temptation assailed Beatrice, and for
the first time her resolution wavered. Why should she not accept
Geoffrey's offer and go away with him--far away from all this misery?
Gladly would she give her life to spend one short year at his dear
side. She had but to say the word, and he would take her to him, and
in a month from now they would be together in some foreign land,
counting the world well lost, as he had said. Doubtless in time Lady
Honoria would get a divorce, and they might be married. A day might
even come when all this would seem like a forgotten night of storm and
fear; when, surrounded by the children of their love, they would wend
peaceably, happily, through the evening of their days towards a bourne
robbed of half its terrors by the fact that they would cross it hand-
in-hand.

Oh, that would be well for her; but would it be well for him? When the
first months of passion had passed by, would he not begin to think of
all that he had thrown away for the sake of a woman's love? Would not
the burst of shame and obloquy which would follow him to the remotest
corners of the earth wear away his affection, till at last, as Lady
Honoria said, he learned to curse and hate her. And if it did not--if
he still loved her through it all--as, being what he was, he well
might do--could she be the one to bring this ruin on him? Oh, it would
have been more kind to let him drown on that night of the storm, when
fate first brought them together to their undoing.

No, no; once and for all, once and for ever, she would /not/ do it.
Cruel as was her strait, heavy as was her burden, not one feather's
weight of it should he carry, if by any means in her poor power she
could hold it from his back. She would not even tell him of what had
happened--at any rate, not now. It would distress him; he might take
some desperate step; it was almost certain that he would do so. Her
answer must be very short.

She was quite close to Coed now, and the water lay calm as a pond. So
calm was it that she drew the sheet of paper and the envelope from her
pocket, and leaning forward, rested them on the arched covering of the
canoe, and pencilled those words which we have already read.

 "No, dear Geoffrey. Things must take their course.--B."

Thus she wrote. Then she paddled to the shore. A fisherman standing on
the beach caught her canoe and pulled it up. Leaving it in his charge,
she went into the quaint little town, directed and posted her letter,
and bought some wool. It was an excuse for having been there should
any one ask questions. After that she returned to her canoe. The
fisherman was standing by it. She offered him sixpence for his
trouble, but he would not take it.

"No, miss," he said, "thanking you kindly--but we don't often get a
peep at such sweet looks. It's worth sixpence to see you, it is. But,
miss, if I may make so bold as to say so, it isn't safe for you to
cruise about in that craft, any ways not alone."

Beatrice thanked him and blushed a little. Vaguely it occurred to her
that she must have more than a common share of beauty, when a rough
man could be so impressed with it. That was what men loved women for,
their beauty, as Owen Davies loved and desired her for this same cause
and this only.

Perhaps it was the same with Geoffrey--no, she did not believe it. He
loved her for other things besides her looks. Only if she had not been
beautiful, perhaps he would not have begun to love her, so she was
thankful for her eyes and hair, and form.

Could folly and infatuation go further? This woman in the darkest hour
of her bottomless and unhorizoned despair, with conscience gnawing at
her heart, with present misery pressing on her breast, and shame to
come hanging over her like a thunder cloud, could yet feel thankful
that she had won this barren love, the spring of all her woe. Or was
her folly deep wisdom in disguise?--is there something divine in a
passion that can so override and defy the worst agonies of life?

She was at sea again now, and evening was falling on the waters softly
as a dream. Well, the letter was posted. Would it be the last, she
wondered? It seemed as though she must write no more letters. And what
was to be done? She would /not/ marry Owen Davies--never would she do
it. She could not so shamelessly violate her feelings, for Beatrice
was a woman to whom death would be preferable to dishonour, however
legal. No, for her own sake she would not be soiled with that
disgrace. Did she do this, she would hold herself the vilest of the
vile. And still less would she do it for Geoffrey's sake. Her instinct
told her what he would feel at such a thing, though he might never say
a word. Surely he would loathe and despise her. No, that idea was done
with--utterly done with.

Then what remained to her? She would not fly with Geoffrey, since to
do so would be to ruin him. She would not marry Owen, and not to do so
would still be to ruin Geoffrey. She was no fool, she was innocent in
act, but she knew that her innocence would indeed be hard to prove--
even her own father did not believe in it, and her sister would openly
accuse her to the world. What then should she do? Should she hide
herself in some remote half-civilised place, or in London? It was
impossible; she had no money, and no means of getting any. Besides,
they would hunt her out, both Owen Davies and Geoffrey would track her
to the furthest limits of the earth. And would not the former think
that Geoffrey had spirited her away, and at once put his threats into
execution? Obviously he would. There was no hope in that direction.
Some other plan must be found or her lover would still be ruined.

So argued Beatrice, still thinking not of herself, but of Geoffrey, of
that beloved one who was more to her than all the world, more, a
thousand times, than her own safety or well-being. Perhaps she
overrated the matter. Owen Davies, Lady Honoria, and even Elizabeth
might have done all they threatened; the first of them, perhaps the
first two of them, certainly would have done so. But still Geoffrey
might have escaped destruction. Public opinion, or the sounder part of
it, is sensibly enough hard to move in such a matter, especially when
the person said to have been wronged is heart and soul on the side of
him who is said to have wronged her.

Moreover there might have been ways out of it, of which she knew
nothing. But surrounded as she was by threatening powers--by Lady
Honoria threatening actions in the Courts on one side, by Owen Davies
threatening exposure on another, by Elizabeth ready and willing to
give the most damning evidence on the third, to Beatrice the worst
consequences seemed an absolutely necessary sequence. Then there was
her own conscience arrayed against her. This particular charge was a
lie, but it was not a lie that she loved Geoffrey, and to her the two
things seemed very much the same thing. Hers was not a mind to draw
fine distinctions in such matters. /Se posuit ut culpabilem/: she
"placed herself as guilty," as the old Court rolls put it in miserable
Latin, and this sense of guilt disarmed her. She did not realise the
enormous difference recognised by the whole civilised world between
thought and act, between disposing mind and inculpating deed. Beatrice
looked at the question more from the scriptural point of view,
remembering that in the Bible such fine divisions are expressly stated
to be distinctions without a difference.

Had she gone to Geoffrey and told him her whole story it is probable
that he would have defied the conspiracy, faced it out, and possibly
come off victorious. But, with that deadly reticence of which women
alone are capable, this she did not and would not do. Sweet loving
woman that she was, she would not burden him with her sorrows, she
would bear them alone--little reckoning that thereby she was laying up
a far, far heavier load for him to carry through all his days.

So Beatrice accepted the statements of the plaintiff's attorney for
gospel truth, and from that false standpoint she drew her auguries.



Oh, she was weary! How lovely was the falling night, see how it
brooded on the seas! and how clear were the waters--there a fish
passed by her paddle--and there the first start sprang into the sky!
If only Geoffrey were here to see it with her. Geoffrey! she had lost
him; she was alone in the world now--alone with the sea and the stars.
Well, they were better than men--better than all men except one.
Theirs was a divine companionship, and it soothed her. Ah, how hateful
had been Elizabeth's face, more hateful even than the half-crazed
cunning of Owen Davies, when she stretched her hand towards her and
called her "a scarlet woman." It was so like Elizabeth, this mixing up
of Bible terms with her accusation. And after all perhaps it was true.
--What was it, "Though thy sins be as scarlet, yet shall they be white
as snow." But that was only if one repented. She did not repent, not
in the least. Conscience, it is true, reproached her with a breach of
temporal and human law, but her heart cried that such love as she had
given was immortal and divine, and therefore set beyond the little
bounds of time and man. At any rate, she loved Geoffrey and was proud
and glad to love him. The circumstances were unfortunate, but she did
not make the world or its social arrangements any more than she had
made herself, and she could not help that. The fact remained, right or
wrong--she loved him, loved him!

How clear were the waters! What was that wild dream which she had
dreamt about herself sitting at the bottom of the sea, and waiting for
him--till at last he came. Sitting at the bottom of the sea--why did
it strike her so strangely--what unfamiliar thought did it waken in
her mind? Well, and why not? It would be pleasant there, better at any
rate than on the earth. But things cannot be ended so; one is burdened
with the flesh, and one must wear it till it fails. Why must she wear
it? Was not the sea large enough to hide her bones? Look now, she had
but to slip over the edge of the canoe, slip without a struggle into
those mighty arms, and in a few short minutes it would all be done and
gone!

She gasped as the thought struck home. /Here/ was the answer to her
questionings, the same answer that is given to every human troubling,
to all earthly hopes and fears and strivings. One stroke of that black
knife and everything would be lost or found. Would it be so great a
thing to give her life for Geoffrey?--why she had well nigh done as
much when she had known him but an hour, and now that he was all in
all, oh, would it be so great a thing? If she died--died secretly,
swiftly, surely--Geoffrey would be saved; they would not trouble him
then, there would be no one to trouble about: Owen Davies could not
marry her then, Geoffrey could not ruin himself over her, Elizabeth
could pursue her no further. It would be well to do this thing for
Geoffrey, and he would always love her, and beyond that black curtain
there might be something better.

They said that it was sin. Yes, it might be sin to act thus for
oneself alone. But to do it for another--how of that! Was not the
Saviour whom they preached a Man of Sacrifice? Would it be a sin in
her to die for Geoffrey, to sacrifice herself that Geoffrey might go
free?

Oh, it would be no great merit. Her life was not so easy that she
should fear this pure embrace. It would be better, far better, than to
marry Owen Davies, than to desecrate their love and teach Geoffrey to
despise her. And how else could she ward this trouble from him except
by her death, or by a marriage that in her eyes was more dreadful than
any death?



She could not do it yet. She could not die until she had once more
seen his face, even though he did not see hers. No, not to-night would
she seek this swift solution. She had words to say--or words to write
--before the end. Already they rushed in upon her mind!

But if no better plan presented itself she would do it, she was sure
that she would. It was a sin--well, let it be a sin; what did she care
if she sinned for Geoffrey? He would not think the worse of her for
it. And she had hope, yes, Geoffrey had taught her to hope. If there
was a Hell, why it was here. And yet not all a Hell, for in it she had
found her love!



It grew dark; she could hear the whisper of the waves upon Bryngelly
beach. It grew dark; the night was closing round. She paddled to
within a few fathoms of the shore, and called in her clear voice.

"Ay, ay, miss," answered old Edward from the beach. "Come in on the
next wave."

She came in accordingly and her canoe was caught and dragged high and
dry.

"What, Miss Beatrice," said the old man shaking his head and
grumbling, "at it again! Out all alone in that thing," and he gave the
canoe a contemptuous kick, "and in the dark, too. You want a husband
to look after you, you do. You'll never rest till you're drowned."

"No, Edward," she answered with a little laugh. "I don't suppose that
I shall. There is no peace for the wicked above seas, you know. Now do
not scold. The canoe is as safe as church in this weather and in the
bay."

"Oh, yes, it's safe enough in the calm and the bay," he answered, "but
supposing it should come on to blow and supposing you should drift
beyond the shelter of Rumball Point there, and get the rollers down on
you--why you would be drowned in five minutes. It's wicked, miss,
that's what it is."

Beatrice laughed again and went.

"She's a funny one she is," said the old man scratching his head as he
looked after her, "of all the woman folk as ever I knowed she is the
rummest. I sometimes thinks she wants to get drowned. Dash me if I
haven't half a mind to stave a hole in the bottom of that there damned
canoe, and finish it."

Beatrice reached home a little before supper time. Her first act was
to call Betty the servant and with her assistance to shift her bed and
things into the spare room. With Elizabeth she would have nothing more
to do. They had slept together since they were children, now she had
done with her. Then she went in to supper, and sat through it like a
statue, speaking no word. Her father and Elizabeth kept up a strained
conversation, but they did not speak to her, nor she to them.
Elizabeth did not even ask where she had been, nor take any notice of
her change of room.

One thing, however, Beatrice learnt. Her father was going on the
Monday to Hereford by an early train to attend a meeting of clergymen
collected to discuss the tithe question. He was to return by the last
train on the Tuesday night, that is, about midnight. Beatrice now
discovered that Elizabeth proposed to accompany him. Evidently she
wished to see as little as possible of her sister during this week of
truce--possibly she was a little afraid of her. Even Elizabeth might
have a conscience.

So she should be left alone from Monday morning till Tuesday night.
One can do a good deal in forty hours.

After supper Beatrice rose and left the room, without a word, and they
were glad when she went. She frightened them with her set face and
great calm eyes. But neither spoke to the other on the subject. They
had entered into a conspiracy of silence.

Beatrice locked her door and then sat at the window lost in thought.
When once the idea of suicide has entered the mind it is apt to grow
with startling rapidity. She reviewed the whole position; she went
over all the arguments and searched the moral horizon for some
feasible avenue of escape. But she could find none that would save
Geoffrey, except this. Yes, she would do it, as many another wretched
woman had done before her, not from cowardice indeed, for had she
alone been concerned she would have faced the thing out, fighting to
the bitter end--but for this reason only, it would cut off the dangers
which threatened Geoffrey at their very root and source. Of course
there must be no scandal; it must never be known that she had killed
herself, or she might defeat her own object, for the story would be
raked up. But she well knew how to avoid such a possibility; in her
extremity Beatrice grew cunning as a fox. Yes, and there might be an
inquest at which awkward questions would be asked. But, as she well
knew also, before an inquest can be held there must be something to
hold it on, and that something would not be there.



And so in the utter silence of the night and in the loneliness of her
chamber did Beatrice dedicate herself to sacrifice upon the altar of
her immeasurable love. She would face the last agonies of death when
the bloom of her youthful strength and beauty was but opening as a
rose in June. She would do more, she would brave the threatened
vengeance of the most High, coming before Him a self murderess, and
with but one plea for pity--that she loved so well: /quia multum
amavit/. Yes, she would do all this, would leave the warm world in the
dawning summer of her days, and alone go out into the dark--alone
would face those visions which might come--those Shapes of terror, and
those Things of fear, that perchance may wait for sinful human kind.
Alone she would go--oh, hand in hand with him it had been easy, but
this must not be. The door of utter darkness would swing to behind
her, and who could say if in time to come it should open to Geoffrey's
following feet, or if he might ever find the path that she had trod.
It must be done, it should be done! Beatrice rose from her seat with
bright eyes and quick-coming breath, and swore before God, if God
there were, that she would do it, trusting to Him for pardon and for
pity, or failing these--for sleep.

Yes, but first she must once more look upon Geoffrey's dear face--and
then farewell!

Pity her! poor mistaken woman, making of her will a Providence,
rushing to doom. Pity her, but do not blame her overmuch, or if you
do, then blame Judith and Jephtha's daughter and Charlotte Corday, and
all the glorious women who from time to time have risen on this sordid
world of self, and given themselves as an offering upon the altars of
their love, their religion, their honour or their country!



It was finished. Now let her rest while she could, seeing what was to
come. With a sigh for all that was, and all that might have been,
Beatrice lay down and soon slept sweetly as a child.



                            CHAPTER XXVII

                         THE HOUSE OF COMMONS

Next day was Sunday. Beatrice did not go to church. For one thing, she
feared to see Owen Davies there. But she took her Sunday school class
as usual, and long did the children remember how kind and patient she
was with them that day, and how beautifully she told them the story of
the Jewish girl of long ago, who went forth to die for the sake of her
father's oath.

Nearly all the rest of the day and evening she spent in writing that
which we shall read in time--only in the late afternoon she went out
for a little while in her canoe. Another thing Beatrice did also: she
called at the lodging of her assistant, the head school teacher, and
told her it was possible that she would not be in her place on the
Tuesday (Monday was, as it chanced, a holiday). If anybody inquired as
to her absence, perhaps she would kindly tell them that Miss Granger
had an appointment to keep, and had taken a morning's holiday in order
to do so. She should, however, be back that afternoon. The teacher
assented without suspicion, remarking that if Beatrice could not take
a morning's holiday, she was sure she did not know who could.

Next morning they breakfasted very early, because Mr. Granger and
Elizabeth had to catch the train. Beatrice sat through the meal in
silence, her calm eyes looking straight before her, and the others,
gazing on them, and at the lovely inscrutable face, felt an
indefinable fear creep into their hearts. What did this woman mean to
do? That was the question they asked of themselves, though not of each
other. That she meant to do something they were sure, for there was
purpose written on every line of her cold face.

Suddenly, as they sat thinking, and making pretence to eat, a thought
flashed like an arrow into Beatrice's heart, and pierced it. This was
the last meal that they could ever take together, this was the last
time that she could ever see her father's and her sister's faces. For
her sister, well, it might pass--for there are some things which even
a woman like Beatrice can never quite forgive--but she loved her
father. She loved his very faults, even his simple avarice and self-
seeking had become endeared to her by long and wondering
contemplation. Besides, he was her father; he gave her the life she
was about to cast away. And she should never see him more. Not on that
account did she hesitate in her purpose, which was now set in her
mind, like Bryngelly Castle on its rock, but at the thought tears
rushed unbidden to her eyes.

Just then breakfast came to an end, and Elizabeth hurried from the
room to fetch her bonnet.

"Father," said Beatrice, "if you can before you go, I should like to
hear you say that you do not believe that I told you what was false--
about that story."

"Eh, eh!" answered the old man nervously, "I thought that we had
agreed to say nothing about the matter at present."

"Yes, but I should like to hear you say it, father. It cuts me that
you should think that I would lie to you, for in my life I have never
wilfully told you what was not true;" and she clasped her hands about
his arms, and looked into his face.

He gazed at her doubtfully. Was it possible after all she was speaking
the truth? No; it was not possible.

"I can't, Beatrice," he said--"not that I blame you overmuch for
trying to defend yourself; a cornered rat will show fight."

"May you never regret those words," she said; "and now good-bye," and
she kissed him on the forehead.

At this moment Elizabeth entered, saying that it was time to start,
and he did not return the kiss.

"Good-bye, Elizabeth," said Beatrice, stretching out her hand. But
Elizabeth affected not to see it, and in another moment they were
gone. She followed them to the gate and watched them till they
vanished down the road. Then she returned, her heart strained almost
to bursting. But she wept no tear.

Thus did Beatrice bid a last farewell to her father and her sister.

"Elizabeth," said Mr. Granger, as they drew near to the station, "I am
not easy in my thoughts about Beatrice. There was such a strange look
in her eyes; it--in short, it frightens me. I have half a mind to give
up Hereford, and go back," and he stopped upon the road, hesitating.

"As you like," said Elizabeth with a sneer, "but I should think that
Beatrice is big enough and bad enough to look after herself."

"Before the God who made us," said the old man furiously, and striking
the ground with his stick, "she may be bad, but she is not so bad as
you who betrayed her. If Beatrice is a Magdalene, you are a woman
Judas; and I believe that you hate her, and would be glad to see her
dead."

Elizabeth made no answer. They were nearing the station, for her
father had started on again, and there were people about. But she
looked at him, and he never forgot the look. It was quite enough to
chill him into silence, nor did he allude to the matter any more.



When they were gone, Beatrice set about her own preparations. Her wild
purpose was to travel to London, and catch a glimpse of Geoffrey's
face in the House of Commons, if possible, and then return. She put on
her bonnet and best dress; the latter was very plainly made of simple
grey cloth, but on her it looked well enough, and in the breast of it
she thrust the letter which she had written on the previous day. A
small hand-bag, with some sandwiches and a brush and comb in it, and a
cloak, made up the total of her baggage.

The train, which did not stop at Bryngelly, left Coed at ten, and Coed
was an hour and a half's walk. She must be starting. Of course, she
would have to be absent for the night, and she was sorely puzzled how
to account for her absence to Betty, the servant girl; the others
being gone there was no need to do so to anybody else. But here
fortune befriended her. While she was thinking the matter over, who
should come in but Betty herself, crying. She had just heard, she
said, that her little sister, who lived with their mother at a village
about ten miles away, had been knocked down by a cart and badly hurt.
Might she go home for the night? She could come back on the morrow,
and Miss Beatrice could get somebody in to sleep if she was lonesome.

Beatrice sympathised, demurred, and consented, and Betty started at
once. As soon as she was gone, Beatrice locked up the house, put the
key in her pocket, and started on her five miles' tramp. Nobody saw
her leave the house, and she passed by a path at the back of the
village, so that nobody saw her on the road. Reaching Coed Station
quite unobserved, and just before the train was due, she let down her
veil, and took a third-class ticket to London. This she was obliged to
do, for her stock of money was very small; it amounted, altogether, to
thirty-six shillings, of which the fare to London and back would cost
her twenty-eight and fourpence.

In another minute she had entered an empty carriage, and the train had
steamed away.

She reached Paddington about eight that night, and going to the
refreshment room, dined on some tea and bread and butter. Then she
washed her hands, brushed her hair, and started.

Beatrice had never been in London before, and as soon as she left the
station the rush and roar of the huge city took hold of her, and
confused her. Her idea was to walk to the Houses of Parliament at
Westminster. She would, she thought, be sure to see Geoffrey there,
because she had bought a daily paper in which she had read that he was
to be one of the speakers in a great debate on the Irish Question,
which was to be brought to a close that night. She had been told by a
friendly porter to follow Praed Street till she reached the Edgware
Road, then to walk on to the Marble Arch, and ask again. Beatrice
followed the first part of this programme--that is, she walked as far
as the Edgware Road. Then it was that confusion seized her and she
stood hesitating. At this juncture, a coarse brute of a man came up
and made some remark to her. It was impossible for a woman like
Beatrice to walk alone in the streets of London at night, without
running the risk of such attentions. She turned from him, and as she
did so, heard him say something about her beauty to a fellow Arcadian.
Close to where she was stood two hansom cabs. She went to the first
and asked the driver for how much he would take her to the House of
Commons.

"Two bob, miss," he answered.

Beatrice shook her head, and turned to go again. She was afraid to
spend so much on cabs, for she must get back to Bryngelly.

"I'll take yer for eighteenpence, miss," called out the other driver.
This offer she was about to accept when the first man interposed.

"You leave my fare alone, will yer? Tell yer what, miss, I'm a
gentleman, I am, and I'll take yer for a bob."

She smiled and entered the cab. Then came a whirl of great gas-lit
thoroughfares, and in a quarter of an hour they pulled up at the
entrance to the House. Beatrice paid the cabman his shilling, thanked
him, and entered, only once more to find herself confused with a
vision of white statues, marble floors, high arching roofs, and
hurrying people. An automatic policeman asked her what she wanted.
Beatrice answered that she wished to get into the House.

"Pass this way, then, miss--pass this way," said the automatic officer
in a voice of brass. She passed, and passed, and finally found herself
in a lobby, among a crowd of people of all sorts--seedy political
touts, Irish priests and hurrying press-men. At one side of the lobby
were more policemen and messengers, who were continually taking cards
into the House, then returning and calling out names. Insensibly she
drifted towards these policemen.

"Ladies' Gallery, miss?" said a voice; "your order, please, though I
think it's full."

Here was a fresh complication. Beatrice had no order. She had no idea
that one was necessary.

"I haven't got an order," she said faintly. "I did not know that I
must have one. Can I not get in without?"

"Most certainly /not/, miss," answered the voice, while its owner,
suspecting dynamite, surveyed her with a cold official eye. "Now make
way, make way, please."

Beatrice's grey eyes filled with tears, as she turned to go in
bitterness of heart. So all her labour was in vain, and that which
would be done must be done without the mute farewell she sought. Well,
when sorrow was so much, what mattered a little more? She turned to
go, but not unobserved. A certain rather youthful Member of
Parliament, with an eye for beauty in distress, had been standing
close to her, talking to a constituent. The constituent had departed
to wherever constituents go--and many representatives, if asked, would
cheerfully point out a locality suitable to the genus, at least in
their judgment--and the member had overheard the conversation and seen
Beatrice's eyes fill with tears. "What a lovely woman!" he had said to
himself, and then did what he should have done, namely, lifted his hat
and inquired if, as a member of the House, he could be of any service
to her. Beatrice listened, and explained that she was particularly
anxious to get into the Ladies' Gallery.

"I think that I can help you, then," he said. "As it happens a lady,
for whom I got an order, has telegraphed to say that she cannot come.
Will you follow me? Might I ask you to give me your name?"

"Mrs. Everston," answered Beatrice, taking the first that came into
her head. The member looked a little disappointed. He had vaguely
hoped that this lovely creature was unappropriated. Surely her
marriage could not be satisfactory, or she would not look so sad.

Then came more stairs and passages, and formalities, till presently
Beatrice found herself in a kind of bird-cage, crowded to suffocation
with every sort of lady.

"I'm afraid--I am very much afraid----" began her new-found friend,
surveying the mass with dismay.

But at that moment, a stout lady in front feeling faint with the heat,
was forced to leave the Gallery, and almost before she knew where she
was, Beatrice was installed in her place. Her friend had bowed and
vanished, and she was left to all purposes alone, for she never heeded
those about her, though some of them looked at her hard enough,
wondering at her form and beauty, and who she might be.

She cast her eye down over the crowded House, and saw a vision of
hats, collars, and legs, and heard a tumult of sounds: the sharp voice
of a speaker who was rapidly losing his temper, the plaudits of the
Government benches, the interruptions from the Opposition--yes, even
yells, and hoots, and noises, that reminded her remotely of the
crowing of cocks. Possibly had she thought of it, Beatrice would not
have been greatly impressed with the dignity of an assembly, at the
doors of which so many of its members seemed to leave their manners,
with their overcoats and sticks; it might even have suggested the idea
of a bear garden to her mind. But she simply did not think about it.
She searched the House keenly enough, but it was to find one face, and
one only--Ah! there he was.

And now the House of Commons might vanish into the bottomless abyss,
and take with it the House of Lords, and what remained of the British
Constitution, and she would never miss them. For, at the best of
times, Beatrice--in common with most of her sex--in all gratitude be
it said, was /not/ an ardent politician.

There Geoffrey sat, his arms folded--the hat pushed slightly from his
forehead, so that she could see his face. There was her own beloved,
whom she had come so far to see, and whom to-morrow she would dare so
much to save. How sad he looked--he did not seem to be paying much
attention to what was going on. She knew well enough that he was
thinking of her; she could feel it in her head as she had often felt
it before. But she dared not let her mind go out to him in answer,
for, if once she did so, she knew also that he would discover her. So
she sat, and fed her eyes upon his face, taking her farewell of it,
while round her, and beneath her, the hum of the House went on, as
ever present and as unnoticed as the hum of bees upon a summer noon.

Presently the gentleman who had been so kind to her, sat down in the
next seat to Geoffrey, and began to whisper to him, as he did so
glancing once or twice towards the grating behind which she was. She
guessed that he was telling him the story of the lady who was so
unaccountably anxious to hear the debate, and how pretty she was. But
it did not seem to interest Geoffrey much, and Beatrice was feminine
enough to notice it, and to be glad of it. In her gentle jealousy, she
did not like to think of Geoffrey as being interested in accounts of
mysterious ladies, however pretty.

At length a speaker rose--she understood from the murmur of those
around her that he was one of the leaders of the Opposition, and
commenced a powerful and bitter speech. She noticed that Geoffrey
roused himself at this point, and began to listen with attention.

"Look," said one of the ladies near her, "Mr. Bingham is taking notes.
He is going to speak next--he speaks wonderfully, you know. They say
that he is as good as anybody in the House, except Gladstone, and Lord
Randolph."

"Oh!" answered another lady. "Lady Honoria is not here, is she? I
don't see her."

"No," replied the first; "she is a dear creature, and so handsome too
--just the wife for a rising man--but I don't think that she takes
much interest in politics. Are not her dinners charming?"

At this moment, a volley of applause from the Opposition benches
drowned the murmured conversation.

This speaker spoke for about three-quarters of an hour, and then at
last Geoffrey stood up. One or two other members rose at the same
time, but ultimately they gave way.

He began slowly--and somewhat tamely, as it seemed to Beatrice, whose
heart was in her mouth--but when he had been speaking for about five
minutes, he warmed up. And then began one of the most remarkable
oratorical displays of that Parliament. Geoffrey had spoken well
before, and would speak well again, but perhaps he never spoke so well
as he did upon that night. For nearly an hour and a half he held the
House in chains, even the hoots and interruptions died away towards
the end of his oration. His powerful presence seemed to tower in the
place, like that of a giant among pigmies, and his dark, handsome
face, lit with the fires of eloquence, shone like a lamp. He leaned
forward with a slight stoop of his broad shoulders, and addressed
himself, nominally to the Speaker, but really to the Opposition. He
took their facts one by one, and with convincing logic showed that
they were no facts; amid a hiss of anger he pulverised their arguments
and demonstrated their motives. Then suddenly he dropped them
altogether, and addressing himself to the House at large, and the
country beyond the House, he struck another note, and broke out into
that storm of patriotic eloquence which confirmed his growing
reputation, both in Parliament and in the constituencies.

Beatrice shut her eyes and listened to the deep, rich voice as it rose
from height to height and power to power, till the whole place seemed
full of it, and every contending sound was hushed.

Suddenly, after an invocation that would have been passionate had it
not been so restrained and strong, he stopped. She opened her eyes and
looked. Geoffrey was seated as before, with his hat on. He had been
speaking for an hour and a half, and yet, to her, it seemed but a few
minutes since he rose. Then broke out a volley of cheers, in the midst
of which a leader of the Opposition rose to reply, not in the very
best of tempers, for Geoffrey's speech had hit them hard.

He began, however, by complimenting the honourable member on his
speech, "as fine a speech as he had listened to for many years,
though, unfortunately, made from a mistaken standpoint and the wrong
side of the House." Then he twitted the Government with not having
secured the services of a man so infinitely abler than the majority of
their "items," and excited a good deal of amusement by stating, with
some sarcastic humour, that, should it ever be his lot to occupy the
front Treasury bench, he should certainly make a certain proposal to
the honourable member. After this good-natured badinage, he drifted
off into the consideration of the question under discussion, and
Beatrice paid no further attention to him, but occupied herself in
watching Geoffrey drop back into the same apparent state of cold
indifference, from which the necessity of action had aroused him.

Presently the gentleman who had found her the seat came up and spoke
to her, asking her how she was getting on. Very soon he began to speak
of Geoffrey's speech, saying that it was one of the most brilliant of
the session, if not the most brilliant.

"Then Mr. Bingham is a rising man, I suppose?" Beatrice said.

"Rising? I should think so," he answered. "They will get him into the
Government on the first opportunity after this; he's too good to
neglect. Very few men can come to the fore like Mr. Bingham. We call
him the comet, and if only he does not make a mess of his chances by
doing something foolish, there is no reason why he should not be
Attorney-General in a few years."

"Why should he do anything foolish?" she asked.

"Oh, for no reason on earth, that I know of; only, as I daresay you
have noticed, men of this sort are very apt to do ridiculous things,
throw up their career, get into a public scandal, run away with
somebody or something. Not that there should be any fear of such a
thing where Mr. Bingham is concerned, for he has a charming wife, and
they say that she is a great help to him. Why, there is the division
bell. Good-bye, Mrs. Everston, I will come back to see you out."

"Good-bye," Beatrice answered, "and in case I should miss you, I wish
to say something--to thank you for your kindness in helping me to get
in here to-night. You have done me a great service, a very great
service, and I am most grateful to you."

"It is nothing--nothing," he answered. "It has been a pleasure to help
you. If," he added with some confusion, "you would allow me to call
some day, the pleasure will be all the greater. I will bring Mr.
Bingham with me, if you would like to know him--that is, if I can."

Beatrice shook her head. "I cannot," she answered, smiling sadly. "I
am going on a long journey to-morrow, and I shall not return here.
Good-bye."

In another second he was gone, more piqued and interested about this
fair unknown than he had been about any woman for years. Who could she
be? and why was she so anxious to hear the debate? There was a mystery
in it somewhere, and he determined to solve it if he could.

Meanwhile the division took place, and presently the members flocked
back, and amidst ringing Ministerial cheers, and counter Opposition
cheers, the victory of the Government was announced. Then came the
usual formalities, and the members began to melt away. Beatrice saw
the leader of the House and several members of the Government go up to
Geoffrey, shake his hand, and congratulate him. Then, with one long
look, she turned and went, leaving him in the moment of his triumph,
that seemed to interest him so little, but which made Beatrice more
proud at heart than if she had been declared empress of the world.

Oh, it was well to love a man like that, a man born to tower over his
fellow men--and well to die for him! Could she let her miserable
existence interfere with such a life as his should be? Never, never!
There should be no "public scandal" on her account.

She drew her veil over her face, and inquired the way from the House.
Presently she was outside. By one of the gateways, and in the shadow
of its pillars, she stopped, watching the members of the House stream
past her. Many of them were talking together, and once or twice she
caught the sound of Geoffrey's name, coupled with such words as
"splendid speech," and other terms of admiration.

"Move on, move on," said a policeman to her. Lifting her veil,
Beatrice turned and looked at him, and muttering something he moved on
himself, leaving her in peace. Presently she saw Geoffrey and the
gentleman who had been so kind to her walking along together. They
came through the gateway; the lappet of his coat brushed her arm, and
he never saw her. Closer she crouched against the pillar, hiding
herself in its shadow. Within six feet of her Geoffrey stopped and lit
a cigar. The light of the match flared upon his face, that dark,
strong face she loved so well. How tired he looked. A great longing
took possession of her to step forward and speak to him, but she
restrained herself almost by force.

Her friend was speaking to him, and about her.

"Such a lovely woman," he was saying, "with the clearest and most
beautiful grey eyes that I ever saw. But she has gone like a dream. I
can't find her anywhere. It is a most mysterious business."

"You are falling in love, Tom," answered Geoffrey absently, as he
threw away the match and walked on. "Don't do that; it is an unhappy
thing to do," and he sighed.

He was going! Oh, heaven! she would never, never see him more! A cold
horror seized upon Beatrice, her blood seemed to stagnate. She
trembled so much that she could scarcely stand. Leaning forward, she
looked after him, with such a face of woe that even the policeman, who
had repented him of his forbearance, and was returning to send her
away, stood astonished. The two men had gone about ten yards, when
something induced Beatrice's friend to look back. His eye fell upon
the white, agony-stricken face, now in the full glare of the gas lamp.

Beatrice saw him turn, and understood her danger. "Oh, good-bye,
Geoffrey!" she murmured, for a second allowing her heart to go forth
towards him. Then realising what she had done, she dropped her veil,
and went swiftly. The gentleman called "Tom"--she never learnt his
name--stood for a moment dumbfounded, and at that instant Geoffrey
staggered, as though he had been struck by a shot, turned quite white,
and halted.

"Why," said his companion, "there is that lady again; we must have
passed quite close to her. She was looking after us, I saw her face in
the gaslight--and I never want to see such another."

Geoffrey seized him by the arm. "Where is she?" he asked, "and what
was she like?"

"She was there a second ago," he said, pointing to the pillar, "but
I've lost her now--I fancy she went towards the railway station, but I
could not see. Stop, is that she?" and he pointed to a tall person
walking towards the Abbey.

Quickly they moved to intercept her, but the result was not
satisfactory, and they retreated hastily from the object of their
attentions.

Meanwhile Beatrice found herself opposite the entrance to the
Westminster Bridge Station. A hansom was standing there; she got into
it and told the man to drive to Paddington.

Before the pair had retraced their steps she was gone. "She has
vanished again," said "Tom," and went on to give a description of her
to Geoffrey. Of her dress he had unfortunately taken little note. It
might be one of Beatrice's, or it might not. It seemed almost
inconceivable to Geoffrey that she should be masquerading about
London, under the name of Mrs. Everston. And yet--and yet--he could
have sworn--but it was folly!

Suddenly he bade his friend good-night, and took a hansom. "The
mystery thickens," said the astonished "Tom," as he watched him drive
away. "I would give a hundred pounds to find out what it all means.
Oh! that woman's face--it haunts me. It looked like the face of an
angel bidding farewell to Heaven."

But he never did find out any more about it, though the despairing
eyes of Beatrice, as she bade her mute farewell, still sometimes haunt
his sleep.

Geoffrey reflected rapidly. The thing was ridiculous, and yet it was
possible. Beyond that brief line in answer to his letter, he had heard
nothing from Beatrice. Indeed he was waiting to hear from her before
taking any further step. But even supposing she were in London, where
was he to look for her? He knew that she had no money, he could not
stay there long. It occurred to him there was a train leaving Euston
for Wales about four in the morning. It was just possible that she
might be in town, and returning by this train. He told the cabman to
drive to Euston Station, and on arrival, closely questioned a sleepy
porter, but without satisfactory results.

Then he searched the station; there were no traces of Beatrice. He did
more; he sat down, weary as he was, and waited for an hour and a half,
till it was time for the train to start. There were but three
passengers, and none of them in the least resembled Beatrice.

"It is very strange," Geoffrey said to himself, as he walked away. "I
could have sworn that I felt her presence just for one second. It must
have been nonsense. This is what comes of occult influences, and that
kind of thing. The occult is a nuisance."

If he had only gone to Paddington!



                            CHAPTER XXVIII

                         I WILL WAIT FOR YOU

Beatrice drove back to Paddington, and as she drove, though her face
did not change from its marble cast of woe the great tears rolled down
it, one by one.

They reached the deserted-looking station, and she paid the man out of
her few remaining shillings--seeing that she was a stranger, he
insisted upon receiving half-a-crown. Then, disregarding the
astonished stare of a night porter, she found her way to the waiting
room, and sat down. First she took the letter from her breast, and
added some lines to it in pencil, but she did not post it yet; she
knew that if she did so it would reach its destination too soon. Then
she laid her head back against the wall, and utterly outworn, dropped
to sleep--her last sleep upon this earth, before the longest sleep of
all.

And thus Beatrice waited and slept at Paddington, while her lover
waited and watched at Euston.

At five she woke, and the heavy cloud of sorrow, past, present, and to
come, rushed in upon her heart. Taking her bag, she made herself as
tidy as she could. Then she stepped outside the station into the
deserted street, and finding a space between the houses, watched the
sun rise over the waking world. It was her last sunrise, Beatrice
remembered.

She came back filled with such thoughts as might well strike the heart
of a woman about to do the thing she had decreed. The refreshment bar
was open now, and she went to it, and bought a cup of coffee and some
bread and butter. Then she took her ticket, not to Bryngelly or to
Coed, but to the station on this side of Bryngelly, and three miles
from it. She would run less risk of being noticed there. The train was
shunted up; she took her seat in it. Just as it was starting, an early
newspaper boy came along, yawning. Beatrice bought a copy of the
/Standard/, out of the one and threepence that was left of her money,
and opened it at the sheet containing the leading articles. The first
one began, "The most powerful, closely reasoned, and eloquent speech
made last night by Mr. Bingham, the Member for Pillham, will, we feel
certain, produce as great an effect on the country as it did in the
House of Commons. We welcome it, not only on account of its value as a
contribution to the polemics of the Irish Question, but as a positive
proof of what has already been suspected, that the Unionist party has
in Mr. Bingham a young statesman of a very high order indeed, and one
whom remarkable and rapid success at the Bar has not hampered, as is
too often the case, in the larger and less technical field of
politics."

And so on. Beatrice put the paper down with a smile of triumph.
Geoffrey's success was splendid and unquestioned. Nothing could stop
him now. During all the long journey she pleased her imagination by
conjuring up picture after picture of that great future of his, in
which she would have no share. And yet he would not forget her; she
was sure of this. Her shadow would go with him from year to year, even
to the end, and at times he might think how proud she would have been
could she be present to record his triumphs. Alas! she did not
remember that when all is lost which can make life beautiful, when the
sun has set, and the spirit gone out of the day, the poor garish
lights of our little victories can but ill atone for the glories that
have been. Happiness and content are frail plants which can only
flourish under fair conditions if at all. Certainly they will not
thrive beneath the gloom and shadow of a pall, and when the heart is
dead no triumphs, however splendid, and no rewards, however great, can
compensate for an utter and irredeemable loss. She never guessed, poor
girl, that time upon time, in the decades to be, Geoffrey would gladly
have laid his honours down in payment for one year of her dear and
unforgotten presence. She was too unselfish; she did not think that a
man could thus prize a woman's love, and took it for an axiom that to
succeed in life was his one real object--a thing to which so divine a
gift as she had given Geoffrey is as nothing. It was therefore this
Juggernaut of her lover's career that Beatrice would cast down her
life, little knowing that thereby she must turn the worldly and
temporal success, which he already held so cheap, to bitterness and
ashes.

At Chester Beatrice got out of the train and posted her letter to
Geoffrey. She would not do so till then because it might have reached
him too soon--before all was finished! Now it would be delivered to
him in the House after everything had been accomplished in its order.
She looked at the letter; it was, she thought, the last token that
could ever pass between them on this earth. Once she pressed it to her
heart, once she touched it with her lips, and then put it from her
beyond recall. It was done; there was no going back now. And even as
she stood the postman came up, whistling, and opening the box
carelessly swept its contents into his canvas bag. Could he have known
what lay among them he would have whistled no more that day.

Beatrice continued her journey, and by three o'clock arrived safely at
the little station next to Bryngelly. There was a fair at Coed that
day, and many people of the peasant class got in here. Amidst the
confusion she gave up her ticket to a small boy, who was looking the
other way at the time, and escaped without being noticed by a soul.
Indeed, things happened so that nobody in the neighbourhood of
Bryngelly ever knew that Beatrice had been to London and back upon
those dreadful days.

Beatrice walked along the cliff, and in an hour was at the door of the
Vicarage, from which she seemed to have been away for years. She
unlocked it and entered. In the letter-box was a post-card from her
father stating that he and Elizabeth had changed their plans and would
not be back till the train which arrived at half-past eight on the
following morning. So much the better, she thought. Then she
disarranged the clothes upon her bed to make it seem as though it had
been slept it, lit the kitchen fire, and put the kettle on to boil,
and as soon as it was ready she took some food. She wanted all her
nerve, and that could not be kept up without food.

Shortly after this the girl Betty returned, and went about her duties
in the house quite unconscious that Beatrice had been away from it for
the whole night. Her sister was much better, she said, in answer to
Beatrice's inquiries.

When she had eaten what she could--it was not much--Beatrice went to
her room, undressed herself, bathed, and put on clean, fresh things.
Then she unbound her lovely hair, and did it up in a coronet upon her
head. It was a fashion that she did not often adopt, because it took
too much time, but on this day, of all days, she had a strange fancy
to look her best. Also her hair had been done like this on the
afternoon when Geoffrey first met her. Next she put on the grey dress
once more which she had worn on her journey to London, and taking the
silver Roman ring that Geoffrey had given her from the string by which
she wore it about her neck, placed it on the third finger of her left
hand.

All this being done, Beatrice visited the kitchen and ordered the
supper. She went further in her innocent cunning. Betty asked her what
she would like for breakfast on the following morning, and she told
her to cook some bacon, and to be careful how she cut it, as she did
not like thick bacon. Then, after one long last look at the Vicarage,
she started for the lodging of the head teacher of the school, and,
having found her, inquired as to the day's work.

Further, Beatrice told her assistant that she had determined to alter
the course of certain lessons in the school. The Wednesday arithmetic
class had hitherto been taken before the grammar class. On the morrow
she had determined to change this; she would take the grammar class at
ten and the arithmetic class at eleven, and gave her reasons for so
doing. The teacher assented, and Beatrice shook hands with her and
bade her good-night. She would have wished to say how much she felt
indebted to her for her help in the school, but did not like to do so,
fearing lest, in the light of pending events, the remark might be
viewed with suspicion.

Poor Beatrice, these were the only lies she ever told!

She left the teacher's lodgings, and was about to go down to the beach
and sit there till it was time, when she was met by the father of the
crazed child, Jane Llewellyn.

"Oh, Miss Beatrice," he said, "I have been looking for you everywhere.
We are in sad trouble, miss. Poor Jane is in a raving fit, and talking
about hell and that, and the doctor says she's dying. Can you come,
miss, and see if you can do anything to quiet her? It's a matter of
life and death, the doctor says, miss."

Beatrice smiled sadly; matters of life and death were in the air. "I
will come," she said, "but I shall not be able to stay long."

How could she better spend her last hour?

She accompanied the man to his cottage. The child, dressed only in a
night-shirt, was raving furiously, and evidently in the last stage of
exhaustion, nor could the doctor or her mother do anything to quiet
her.

"Don't you see," she screamed, pointing to the wall, "there's the
Devil waiting for me? And, oh, there's the mouth of hell where the
minister said I should go! Oh, hold me, hold me, hold me!"

Beatrice walked up to her, took the thin little hands in hers, and
looked her fixedly in the eyes.

"Jane," she said. "Jane, don't you know me?"

"Yes, Miss Granger," she said, "I know the lesson; I will say it
presently."

Beatrice took her in her arms, and sat down on the bed. Quieter and
quieter grew the child till suddenly an awful change passed over her
face.

"She is dying," whispered the doctor.

"Hold me close, hold me close!" said the child, whose senses returned
before the last eclipse. "Oh, Miss Granger, I shan't go to hell, shall
I? I am afraid of hell."

"No, love, no; you will go to heaven."

Jane lay still awhile. Then seeing the pale lips move, Beatrice put
her ear to the child's mouth.

"Will you come with me?" she murmured; "I am afraid to go alone."

And Beatrice, her great grey eyes fixed steadily on the closing eyes
beneath, whispered back so that no other soul could hear except the
dying child:

"Yes, I will come presently." But Jane heard and understood.

"Promise," said the child.

"Yes, I promise," answered Beatrice in the same inaudible whisper.
"Sleep, dear, sleep; I will join you very soon."

And the child looked up, shivered, smiled--and slept.

Beatrice gave it back to the weeping parents and went her way. "What a
splendid creature," said the doctor to himself as he looked after her.
"She has eyes like Fate, and the face of Motherhood Incarnate. A great
woman, if ever I saw one, but different from other women."

Meanwhile Beatrice made her way to old Edward's boat-shed. As she
expected, there was nobody there, and nobody on the beach. Old Edward
and his son were at tea, with the rest of Bryngelly. They would come
back after dark and lock up the boat-house.

She looked at the sea. There were no waves, but the breeze freshened
every minute, and there was a long slow swell upon the water. The
rollers would be running beyond the shelter of Rumball Point, five
miles away.

The tide was high; it mounted to within ten yards of the end of the
boat-house. She opened the door, and dragged out her canoe, closing
the door again after her. The craft was light, and she was strong for
a woman. Close to the boat-house one of the timber breakwaters, which
are common at sea-side places, ran down into the water. She dragged
the canoe to its side, and then pushed it down the beach till its bow
was afloat. Next, mounting on the breakwater, she caught hold of the
little chain in the bow, and walking along the timber baulks, pulled
with all her force till the canoe was quite afloat. On she went,
dragging it after her, till the waves washing over the breakwater
wetted her shoes.

Then she brought the canoe quite close, and, watching her opportunity,
stepped into it, nearly falling into the water as she did so. But she
recovered her balance, and sat down. In another minute she was
paddling out to sea with all her strength.

For twenty minutes or more she paddled unceasingly. Then she rested
awhile, only keeping the canoe head on to the sea, which, without
being rough, was running more and more freshly. There, some miles
away, was the dark mass of Rumball Point. She must be off it before
the night closed in. There would be sea enough there; no such craft as
hers could live in it for five minutes, and the tide was on the turn.
Anything sinking in those waters would be carried far away, and never
come back to the shore of Wales.

She turned her head and looked at Bryngelly, and the long familiar
stretch of cliff. How fair it seemed, bathed in the quiet lights of
summer afternoon. Oh! was there any afternoon where the child had
gone, and where she was following fast?--or was it all night, black,
eternal night, unbroken by the dram of dear remembered things?

There were the Dog Rocks, where she had stood on that misty autumn
day, and seen the vision of her coffined mother's face. Surely it was
a presage of her fate. There beyond was the Bell Rock, where in that
same hour Geoffrey and she had met, and behind it was the
Amphitheatre, where they had told their love. Hark! what was that
sound pealing faintly at intervals across the deep? It was the great
ship's bell that, stirred from time to time by the wash of the high
tide, solemnly tolled her passing soul.

She paddled on; the sound of that death-knell shook her nerves, and
made her feel faint and weak. Oh, it would have been easier had she
been as she was a year ago, before she learned to love, and hand in
hand had seen faith and hope re-arise from the depths of her stirred
soul. Then being but a heathen, she could have met her end with all a
heathen's strength, knowing what she lost, and believing, too, that
she would find but sleep. And now it was otherwise, for in her heart
she did not believe that she was about utterly to perish. What, could
the body live on in a thousand forms, changed indeed but
indestructible and immortal, while the spiritual part, with all its
hopes and loves and fears, melted into nothingness? It could not be;
surely on some new shore she should once again greet her love. And if
it was not, how would they meet her in that under world, coming self-
murdered, her life-blood on her hands? Would her mother turn away from
her? and the little brother, whom she had loved, would he reject her?
And what Voice of Doom might strike her into everlasting hopelessness?

But, be the sin what it might, yet would she sin it for the sake of
Geoffrey; ay, even if she must reap a harvest of eternal woe. She bent
her head and prayed. "Oh, Power, that art above, from whom I come, to
whom I go, have mercy on me! Oh, Spirit, if indeed thy name is Love,
weigh my love in thy balance, and let it lift the scale of sin. Oh,
God of Sacrifice, be not wroth at my deed of sacrifice and give me
pardon, give me life and peace, that in a time to come I may win the
sight of him for whom I die."

A somewhat heathenish prayer indeed, and far too full of human passion
for one about to leave the human shores. But, then--well, it was
Beatrice who prayed--Beatrice, who could realise no heaven beyond the
limits of her passion, who still thought more of her love than of
saving her own soul alive. Perhaps it found a home--perhaps, like her
who prayed it, it was lost upon the pitiless deep.

Then Beatrice prayed no more. Short was her time. See, there sank the
sun in glory; and there the great rollers swept along past the sullen
headland, where the undertow met wind and tide. She would think no
more of self; it was, it seemed to her, so small, this mendicant
calling on the Unseen, not for others, but for self: aid for self,
well-being for self, salvation for self--this doing of good that good
might come to self. She had made her prayer, and if she prayed again
it should be for Geoffrey, that he might prosper and be happy--that he
might forgive the trouble her love had brought into his life. That he
might forget her she could not pray. She had prayed her prayer and
said her say, and it was done with. Let her be judged as it seemed
good to Those who judge! Now she would fix her thoughts upon her love,
and by its strength would she triumph over the bitterness of death.
Her eyes flashed and her breast heaved: further out to sea, further
yet--she would meet those rollers a knot or more from the point of the
headland, that no record might remain.

Was it her wrong if she loved him? She could not help it, and she was
proud to love him. Even now, she would not undo the past. What were
the lines that Geoffrey had read to her. They haunted her mind with a
strange persistence--they took time to the beat of her falling paddle,
and would not leave her:

 "Of once sown seed, who knoweth what the crop is?
  Alas, my love, Love's eyes are very blind!
  What would they have us do? Sunflowers and poppies
  Stoop to the wind----"[*]

[*] Oliver Madox Brown.

Yes, yes, Love's eyes are very blind, but in their blindness there was
more light than in all other earthly things. Oh, she could not live
for him, and with him--it was denied to her--but she still could die
for him, her darling, her darling!



"Geoffrey, hear me--I die for you; accept my sacrifice, and forget me
not." So!--she is in the rollers--how solemn they are with their hoary
heads of foam, as one by one they move down upon her.

The first! it towers high, but the canoe rides it like a cork. Look!
the day is dying on the distant land, but still his glory shines
across the sea. Presently all will be finished. Here the breeze is
strong; it tears the bonnet from her head, it unwinds the coronet of
braided locks, and her bright hair streams out behind her. Feel how
the spray stings, striking like a whip. No, not this wave, she rides
that also; she will die as she has lived--fighting to the last; and
once more, never faltering, she sets her face towards the rollers and
consigns her soul to doom.

Ah! that struck her full. Oh, see! Geoffrey's ring has slipped from
her wet hand, falling into the bottom of the boat. Can she regain it?
she would die with that ring upon her finger--it is her marriage-ring,
wedding her through death to Geoffrey, upon the altar of the sea. She
stoops! oh, what a shock of water at her breast! What was it--what was
it?--/Of once sown seed, who knoweth what the crop is?/ She must soon
learn now!

"Geoffrey! hear me, Geoffrey!--I die, I die for you! I will wait for
you at the foundations of the sea, on the topmost heights of heaven,
in the lowest deeps of hell--wherever I am I will always wait for
you!"

It sinks--it has sunk--she is alone with God, and the cruel waters.
The sun goes out! Look on that great white wave seething through the
deepening gloom; hear it rushing towards her, big with fate.

"Geoffrey, my darling--I will wait----"



Farewell to Beatrice! The light went out of the sky and darkness
gathered on the weltering sea. Farewell to Beatrice, and all her love
and all her sin.



                             CHAPTER XXIX

                         A WOMAN'S LAST WORD

Geoffrey came down to breakfast about eleven o'clock on the morning of
that day the first hours of which he had spent at Euston Station. Not
seeing Effie, he asked Lady Honoria where she was, and was informed
that Anne, the French /bonne/, said the child was not well and that
she had kept her in bed to breakfast.

"Do you mean to say that you have not been up to see what is the
matter with her?" asked Geoffrey.

"No, not yet," answered his wife. "I have had the dressmaker here with
my new dress for the duchess's ball to-morrow; it's lovely, but I
think that there is a little too much of that creamy lace about it."

With an exclamation of impatience, Geoffrey rose and went upstairs. He
found Effie tossing about in bed, her face flushed, her eyes wide
open, and her little hands quite hot.

"Send for the doctor at once," he said.

The doctor came and examined the child, asking her if she had wet her
feet lately.

"Yes, I did, two days ago. I wet my feet in a puddle in the street,"
she answered. "But Anne did say that they would soon get dry, if I
held them to the fire, because my other boots was not clean. Oh, my
head does ache, daddie."

"Ah," said the doctor, and then covering the child up, took Geoffrey
aside and told him that his daughter had a mild attack of inflammation
of the lungs. There was no cause for anxiety, only she must be looked
after and guarded from chills.

Geoffrey asked if he should send for a trained nurse.

"Oh, no," said the doctor. "I do not think it is necessary, at any
rate at present. I will tell the nurse what to do, and doubtless your
wife will keep an eye on her."

So Anne was called up, and vowed that she would guard the cherished
child like the apple of her eye. Indeed, no, the boots were not wet--
there was a little, a very little mud on them, that was all.

"Well, don't talk so much, but see that you attend to her properly,"
said Geoffrey, feeling rather doubtful, for he did not trust Anne.
However, he thought he would see himself that there was no neglect.
When she heard what was the matter, Lady Honoria was much put out.

"Really," she said, "children are the most vexatious creatures in the
world. The idea of her getting inflammation of the lungs in this
unprovoked fashion. The end of it will be that I shall not be able to
go to the duchess's ball to-morrow night, and she was so kind about
it, she made quite a point of my coming. Besides I have bought that
lovely new dress on purpose. I should never have dreamed of going to
so much expense for anything else."

"Don't trouble yourself," said Geoffrey. "The House does not sit
to-morrow; I will look after her. Unless Effie dies in the interval,
you will certainly be able to go to the ball."

"Dies--what nonsense! The doctor says that it is a very slight attack.
Why should she die?"

"I am sure I hope that there is no fear of anything of the sort,
Honoria. Only she must be properly looked after. I do not trust this
woman Anne. I have half a mind to get in a trained nurse after all."

"Well, if you do, she will have to sleep out of the house, that's all.
Amelia (Lady Garsington) is coming up to-night, and I must have
somewhere to put her maid, and there is no room for another bed in
Effie's room."

"Oh, very well, very well," said Geoffrey, "I daresay that it will be
all right, but if Effie gets any worse, you will please understand
that room must be made."

But Effie did not get worse. She remained much about the same.
Geoffrey sat at home all day and employed himself in reading briefs;
fortunately he had not to go to court. About six o'clock he went down
to the House, and having dined very simply and quietly, took his seat
and listened to some dreary talk, which was being carried on for the
benefit of the reporters, about the adoption of the Welsh language in
the law courts of Wales.

Suddenly he became aware of a most extraordinary sense of oppression.
An indefinite dread took hold of him, his very soul was filled with
terrible apprehensions and alarm. Something dreadful seemed to knock
at the portals of his sense, a horror which he could not grasp. His
mind was confused, but little by little it grew clearer, and he began
to understand that a danger threatened Beatrice, that she was in great
peril. He was sure of it. Her agonised dying cries reached him where
he was, though in no form which he could understand; once more her
thought beat on his thought--once more and for the last time her
spirit spoke to his.

Then suddenly a cold wind seemed to breathe upon his face and lift his
hair, and everything was gone. His mind was as it had been; again he
heard the dreary orator and saw the members slipping away to dinner.
The conditions that disturbed him had passed, things were as they had
been. Nor was this strange! For the link was broken. Beatrice was
/dead/. She had passed into the domains of impenetrable silence.



Geoffrey sat up with a gasp, and as he did so a letter was placed in
his hand. It was addressed in Beatrice's handwriting and bore the
Chester postmark. A chill fear seized him. What did it contain? He
hurried with it into a private room and opened it. It was dated from
Bryngelly on the previous Sunday and had several inclosures.

 "My dearest Geoffrey," it began, "I have never before addressed you
  thus on paper, nor should I do so now, knowing to what risks such
  written words might put you, were it not that occasions may arise
  (as in this case) which seem to justify the risk. For when all
  things are ended between a man and a woman who are to each other
  what we have been, then it is well that the one who goes should
  speak plainly before speech becomes impossible, if only that the
  one who is left should not misunderstand that which has been done.

 "Geoffrey, it is probable--it is almost certain--that before your
  eyes read these words I shall be where in the body they can never
  see me more. I write to you from the brink of the grave; when you
  read it, it will have closed over me.

 "Geoffrey, I shall be dead.

 "I received your dear letter (it is destroyed now) in which you
  expressed a wish that I should come away with you to some other
  country, and I answered it in eight brief words. I dared not
  trust myself to write more, nor had I any time. How could you
  think that I should ever accept such an offer for my own sake,
  when to do so would have been to ruin you? But first I will tell
  you all that has happened here." (Here followed a long and exact
  description of those events with which we are already acquainted,
  including the denunciation of Beatrice by her sister, the threats
  of Owen Davies as regards Geoffrey himself, and the measures which
  she had adopted to gain time.)

 "Further," the letter continued, "I inclose you your wife's letter
  to me. And here I wish to state that I have not one word to say
  against Lady Honoria or her letter. I think that she was perfectly
  justified in writing as she did, for after all, dear Geoffrey, you
  are her husband, and in loving each other we have offended against
  her. She tells me truly that it is my duty to make all further
  communications between us impossible. There is only one way to do
  this, and I take it.

 "And now I have spoken enough about myself, nor do I wish to enter
  into details that could only give you pain. There will be no
  scandal, dear, and if any word should be raised against you after
  I am gone, I have provided an answer in the second letter which I
  have inclosed. You can print it if necessary; it will be a
  sufficient reply to any talk. Nobody after reading it can believe
  that you were in any way connected with the accident which will
  happen. Dear, one word more--still about myself, you see! Do not
  blame yourself in this matter, for you are not to blame; of my own
  free will I do it, because in the extremity of the circumstances I
  think it best that one should go and the other be saved, rather
  than that both should be involved in a common ruin.

 "Dear, do you remember how in that strange vision of mine, I
  dreamed that you came and touched me on the breast and showed me
  light? So it has come to pass, for you have given me love--that is
  light; and now in death I shall seek for wisdom. And this being
  fulfilled, shall not the rest be fulfilled in its season? Shall I
  not sit in those cloudy halls till I see you come to seek me, the
  word of wisdom on your lips? And since I cannot have you to
  myself, and be all in all to you, why I am glad to go. For here on
  the world is neither rest nor happiness; as in my dream, too often
  does 'Hope seem to rend her starry robes.'

 "I am glad to go from such a world, in which but one happy thing
  has found me--the blessing of your love. I am worn out with the
  weariness and struggle, and now that I have lost you I long for
  rest. I do not know if I sin in what I do; if so, may I be
  forgiven. If forgiveness is impossible, so be it! You will forgive
  me, Geoffrey, and you will always love me, however wicked I may
  be; even if, at the last, you go where I am not, you will remember
  and love the erring woman to whom, being so little, you still were
  all in all. We are not married, Geoffrey, according to the customs
  of the world, but two short days hence I shall celebrate a service
  that is greater and more solemn than any of the earth. For Death
  will be the Priest and that oath which I shall take will be to all
  eternity. Who can prophesy of that whereof man has no sure
  knowledge? Yet I do believe that in a time to come we shall look
  again into each other's eyes, and kiss each other's lips, and be
  one for evermore. If this is so, it is worth while to have lived
  and died; if not, then, Geoffrey, farewell!

 "If I may I will always be near you. Listen to the night wind and
  you shall hear my voice; look on the stars, you will see my eyes;
  and my love shall be as the air you breathe. And when at last the
  end comes, remember me, for if I live at all I shall be about you
  then. What have I more to say? So much, my dear, that words cannot
  convey it. Let it be untold; but whenever you hear or read that
  which is beautiful or tender, think 'this is what Beatrice would
  have said to me and could not!'

 "You will be a great man, dear, the foremost or one of the foremost
  of your age. You have already promised me to persevere to this
  end: I will not ask you to promise afresh. Do not be content to
  accept the world as women must. Great men do not accept the world;
  they reform it--and you are of their number. And when you are
  great, Geoffrey, you will use your power, not for self-interest,
  but to large and worthy ends; you will always strive to help the
  poor, to break down oppression from those who have to bar it, and
  to advance the honour of your country. You will do all this from
  your own heart and not because I ask it of you, but remember that
  your fame will be my best monument--though none shall ever know
  the grave it covers.

 "Farewell, farewell, farewell! Oh, Geoffrey, my darling, to whom I
  have never been a wife, to whom I am more than any wife--do not
  forget me in the long years which are to come. Remember me when
  others forsake you. Do not forget me when others flatter you and
  try to win your love, for none can be to you what I have been--
  none can ever love you more than that lost Beatrice who writes
  these heavy words to-night, and who will pass away blessing you
  with her last breath, to await you, if she may, in the land to
  which your feet also draw daily on."

Then came a tear-stained postscript in pencil dated from Paddington
Station on that very morning.

 "I journeyed to London to see you, Geoffrey. I could not die
  without looking on your face once more. I was in the gallery of
  the House and heard your great speech. Your friend found me a
  place. Afterwards I touched your coat as you passed by the pillar
  of the gateway. Then I ran away because I saw your friend turn and
  look at me. I shall kiss this letter--just here before I close it
  --kiss it there too--it is our last cold embrace. Before the end I
  shall put on the ring you gave me--on my hand, I mean. I have
  always worn it upon my breast. When I touched you as you passed
  through the gateway I thought that I should have broken down and
  called to you--but I found strength not to do so. My heart is
  breaking and my eyes are blind with tears; I can write no more; I
  have no more to say. Now once again good-bye. /Ave atque vale/--
  oh, my love!--B."

The second letter was a dummy. That is to say it purported to be such
an epistle as any young lady might have written to a gentleman friend.
It began, "Dear Mr. Bingham," and ended, "Yours sincerely, Beatrice
Granger," was filled with chit-chat, and expressed hopes that he would
be able to come down to Bryngelly again later in the summer, when they
would go canoeing.

It was obvious, thought Beatrice, that if Geoffrey was accused by Owen
Davies or anybody else of being concerned with her mysterious end, the
production of such a frank epistle written two days previously would
demonstrate the absurdity of the idea. Poor Beatrice, she was full of
precautions!



Let him who may imagine the effect produced upon Geoffrey by this
heartrending and astounding epistle! Could Beatrice have seen his face
when he had finished reading it she would never have committed
suicide. In a minute it became like that of an old man. As the whole
truth sank into his mind, such an agony of horror, of remorse, of
unavailing woe and hopelessness swept across his soul, that for a
moment he thought his vital forces must give way beneath it, and that
he should die, as indeed in this dark hour he would have rejoiced to
do. Oh, how pitiful it was--how pitiful and how awful! To think of
this love, so passionately pure, wasted on his own unworthiness. To
think of this divine woman going down to lonely death for him--a
strong man; to picture her crouching behind that gateway pillar and
touching him as he passed, while he, the thrice accursed fool, knew
nothing till too late; to know that he had gone to Euston and not to
Paddington; to remember the matchless strength and beauty of the love
which he had lost, and that face which he should never see again!
Surely his heart would break. No man could bear it!

And of those cowards who hounded her to death, if indeed she was
already dead! Oh, he would kill Owen Davies--yes, and Elizabeth too,
were it not that she was a woman; and as for Honoria he had done with
her. Scandal, what did he care for scandal? If he had his will there
should be a scandal indeed, for he would beat this Owen Davies, this
reptile, who did not hesitate to use a woman's terrors to prosper the
fulfilling of his lust--yes, and then drag him to the Continent and
kill him there. Only vengeance was left to him!

Stop, he must not give way--perhaps she was not dead--perhaps that
horrible presage of evil which had struck him like a storm was but a
dream. Could he telegraph? No, it was too late; the office at
Bryngelly would be closed--it was past eight now. But he could go.
There was a train leaving a little after nine--he should be there by
half-past six to-morrow. And Effie was ill--well, surely they could
look after her for twenty-four hours; she was in no danger, and he
must go--he could not bear this torturing suspense. Great God! how had
she done the deed!

Geoffrey snatched a sheet of paper and tried to write. He could not,
his hand shook so. With a groan he rose, and going to the refreshment
room swallowed two glasses of brandy one after another. The spirit
took effect on him; he could write now. Rapidly he scribbled on a
sheet of paper:

 "I have been called away upon important business and shall probably
  not be back till Thursday morning. See that Effie is properly
  attended to. If I am not back you must not go to the duchess's
  ball.--Geoffrey Bingham."

Then he addressed the letter to Lady Honoria and dispatched a
commissionaire with it. This done, he called a cab and bade the cabman
drive to Euston as fast as his horse could go.



                             CHAPTER XXX

                            AVE ATQUE VALE

That frightful journey--no nightmare was ever half so awful! But it
came to an end at last--there was the Bryngelly Station. Geoffrey
sprang from the train, and gave his ticket to the porter, glancing in
his face as he did so. Surely if there had been a tragedy the man
would know of it, and show signs of half-joyous emotion as is the
fashion of such people when something awful and mysterious has
happened to somebody else. But he showed no such symptoms, and a
glimmer of hope found its way into Geoffrey's tormented breast.

He left the station and walked rapidly towards the Vicarage. Those who
know what a pitch of horror suspense can reach may imagine his
feelings as he did so. But it was soon to be put an end to now. As he
drew near the Vicarage gate he met the fat Welsh servant girl Betty
running towards him. Then hope left Geoffrey.

The girl recognised him, and in her confusion did not seem in the
least astonished to see him walking there at a quarter to seven on a
summer morning. Indeed, even she vaguely connected Geoffrey with
Beatrice in her mind, for she at once said in her thick English:

"Oh, sir, do you know where Miss Beatrice is?"

"No," he answered, catching at a railing for support. "Why do you ask?
I have not seen her for weeks."

Then the girl plunged into a long story. Mr. Granger and Miss Granger
were away from home, and would not be back for another two hours. Miss
Beatrice had gone out yesterday afternoon, and had not come back to
tea. She, Betty, had not thought much of it, believing that she had
stopped to spend the evening somewhere, and, being very tired, had
gone to bed about eight, leaving the door unlocked. This morning, when
she woke, it was to find that Miss Beatrice had not slept in the house
that night, and she came out to see if she could find her.

"Where was she going when she went out?" Geoffrey asked.

She did not know, but she thought that Miss Beatrice was going out in
the canoe. Leastways she had put on her tennis shoes, which she always
wore when she went out boating.

Geoffrey understood it all now. "Come to the boat-house," he said.

They went down to the beach, where as yet none were about except a few
working people. Near the boat-house Geoffrey met old Edward walking
along with a key in his hand.

"Lord, sir!" he said. "You here, sir! and in that there queer hat,
too. What is it, sir?"

"Did Miss Beatrice go out in her canoe yesterday evening, Edward?"
Geoffrey asked hoarsely.

"No, sir; not as I know on. My boy locked up the boat-house last
night, and I suppose he looked in it first. What! You don't mean to
say---- Stop; we'll soon know. Oh, Goad! the canoe's gone!"

There was a silence, an awful silence. Old Edward broke it.

"She's drowned, sir--that's what she is--drowned at last; and she the
finest woman in Wales. I knewed she would be one day, poor dear! and
she the beauty that she was; and all along of that damned unlucky
little craft. Goad help her! She's drowned, I say----"

Betty burst out into loud weeping at his words.

"Stop that noise, girl," said Geoffrey, turning his pale face towards
her. "Go back to the Vicarage, and if Mr. Granger comes home before I
get back, tell him what we fear. Edward, send some men to search the
shore towards Coed, and some more in a sailing boat. I will walk
towards the Bell Rock--you can follow me."

He started and swiftly tramped along the sands, searching the sea with
his eye. On he walked sullenly, desperately striving to hope against
hope. On, past the Dog Rocks, round the long curve of beach till he
came to the Amphitheatre. The tide was high again; he could barely
pass the projecting point. He was round it, and his heart stood still.
For there, bottom upwards, and gently swaying to and fro as the spent
waves rocked it, was Beatrice's canoe.

Sadly, hopelessly, heavily, Geoffrey waded knee deep into the water,
and catching the bow of the canoe, dragged it ashore. There was, or
appeared to be, nothing in it; of course he could not expect anything
else. Its occupant had sunk and been carried out to sea by the ebb,
whereas the canoe had drifted back to shore with the morning tide.

He reared it upon its end to let the water drain out of it, and from
the hollow of the bow arch something came rolling down, something
bright and heavy, followed by a brown object. Hastily he lowered the
canoe again, and picked up the bright trinket. It was his own ring
come back to him--the Roman ring he had given Beatrice, and which she
told him in the letter she would wear in her hour of death. He touched
it with his lips and placed it back upon his hand, this token from the
beloved dead, vowing that it should never leave his hand in life, and
that after death it should be buried on him. And so it will be,
perhaps to be dug up again thousands of years hence, and once more to
play a part in the romance of unborn ages.

/Ave atque vale/--that was the inscription rudely cut within its
round. Greeting and farewell--her own last words to him. Oh, Beatrice,
Beatrice! to you also /ave atque vale/. You could not have sent a
fitter message. Greeting and farewell! Did it not sum it all? Within
the circle of this little ring was writ the epitome of human life:
here were the beginning and the end of Love and Hate, of Hope and
fear, of Joy and Sorrow.

Beatrice, hail! Beatrice, farewell! till perchance a Spirit rushing
earthward shall cry "/Greeting/," in another tongue, and Death,
descending to his own place, shaking from his wings the dew of tears,
shall answer "/Farewell to me and Night, ye Children of Eternal Day!/"

And what was this other relic? He lifted it--it was Beatrice's tennis
shoe, washed from her foot--Geoffrey knew it, for once he had tied it.

Then Geoffrey broke down--it was too much. He threw himself upon the
great rock and sobbed--that rock where he had sat with her and Heaven
had opened to their sight. But men are not given to such exhibitions
of emotion, and fortunately for him the paroxysm did not last. He
could not have borne it for long.

He rose and went again to the edge of the sea. At this moment old
Edward and his son arrived. Geoffrey pointed to the boat, then held up
the little shoe.

"Ah," said the old man, "as I thought. Goad help her! She's gone;
she'll never come ashore no more, she won't. She's twenty miles away
by now, she is, breast up, with the gulls a-screaming over her. It's
that there damned canoe, that's what it is. I wish to Goad I had broke
it up long ago. I'd rather have built her a boat for nothing, I would.
Damn the unlucky craft!" screamed the old man at the top of his voice,
and turning his head to hide the tears that were streaming down his
rugged face. "And her that I nursed and pulled out of the waters once
all but dead. Damn it, I say! There, take that, you Sea Witch, you!"
and he picked up a great boulder and crashed it through the bottom of
the canoe with all his strength. "You shan't never drown no more. But
it has brought you good luck, it has, sir; you'll be a fortunit man
all your life now. It has brought you the /Drowned One's shoe/."

"Don't break it any more," said Geoffrey. "She used to value it. You
had better bring it along between you--it may be wanted. I am going to
the Vicarage."

He walked back. Mr. Granger and Elizabeth had not yet arrived, but
they were expected every minute. He went into the sitting-room. It was
full of memories and tokens of Beatrice. There lay a novel which he
had given her, and there was yesterday's paper that she had brought
from town, the /Standard/, with his speech in it.

Geoffrey covered his eyes with his hand, and thought. None knew that
she had committed suicide except himself. If he revealed it things
might be said of her; he did not care what was said of him, but he was
jealous of her dead name. It might be said, for instance, that the
whole tale was true, and that Beatrice died because she could no
longer face life without being put to an open shame. Yes, he had
better hold his tongue as to how and why she died. She was dead--
nothing could bring her back. But how then should he account for his
presence there? Easily enough. He would say frankly that he came
because Beatrice had written to him of the charges made against her
and the threats against himself--came to find her dead. And on that
point he would still have a word with Owen Davies and Elizabeth.

Scarcely had he made up his mind when Elizabeth and her father
entered. Clearly from their faces they had as yet heard nothing.

Geoffrey rose, and Elizabeth caught sight of him standing with glowing
eyes and a face like that of Death himself. She recoiled in alarm.

"What brings you here, Mr. Bingham?" she said, in her hard voice.

"Cannot you guess, Miss Granger?" he said sternly. "A few days back
you made certain charges against your sister and myself in the
presence of your father and Mr. Owen Davies. These charges have been
communicated to me, and I have come to answer them and to demand
satisfaction for them."

Mr. Granger fidgeted nervously and looked as though he would like to
escape, but Elizabeth, with characteristic courage, shut the door and
faced the storm.

"Yes, I did make those charges, Mr. Bingham," she said, "and they are
true charges. But stop, we had better send for Beatrice first."

"You may send, but you will not find her."

"What do you mean?--what do you mean?" asked her father
apprehensively.

"It means that he has hidden her away, I suppose," said Elizabeth with
a sneer.

"I mean, Mr. Granger, that your daughter Beatrice is /dead/."

For once startled out of her self-command, Elizabeth gave a little
cry, while her father staggered back against the wall.

"Dead! dead! What do you mean? How did she die?" he asked.

"That is known to God and her alone," answered Geoffrey. "She went out
last evening in her canoe. When I arrived here this morning she was
missed for the first time. I walked along the beach and found the
canoe and this inside of it," and he placed the sodden shoe upon the
table.

There was a silence. In the midst of it, Owen Davies burst into the
room with wild eyes and dishevelled hair.

"Is it true?" he cried, "tell me--it cannot be true that Beatrice is
drowned. She cannot have been taken from me just when I was going to
marry her. Say that it is not true!"

A great fury filled Geoffrey's heart. He walked down the room and shut
the door, a red light swimming before his eyes. Then he turned and
gripped Owen Davies's shoulder like a vice.

"You accursed blackguard--you unmanly cur!" he said; "you and that
wicked woman," and he shook his hand at Elizabeth, "conspired together
to bring a slur upon Beatrice. You did more: you threatened to attack
me, to try and ruin me if she would not give herself up to you. You
loathsome hypocrite, you tortured her and frightened her; now I am
here to frighten /you/. You said that you would make the country ring
with your tales. I tell you this--are you listening to me? If you dare
to mention her name in such a sense, or if that woman dares, I will
break every bone in your wretched body--by Heaven I will kill you!"
and he cast Davies from him, and as he did so, struck him heavily
across the face with the back of his hand.

The man took no notice either of his words or of the deadly insult of
the blow.

"Is it true?" he screamed, "is it true that she is dead?"

"Yes," said Geoffrey, following him, and bending his tall square frame
over him, for Davies had fallen against the wall, "yes, it is true--
she is dead--and beyond your reach for ever. Pray to God that you may
not one day be called her murderers, all of you--you shameless
cowards."

Owen Davies gave one shrill cry and sank in a huddled heap upon the
ground.

"There is no God," he moaned; "God promised her to me, to be my own--
you have killed her; you--you seduced her first and then you killed
her. I believe you killed her. Oh, I shall go mad!"

"Mad or sane," said Geoffrey, "say those words once more and I will
stamp the life out of you where you are. You say that God promised her
to you--promised that woman to a hound like you. Ah, be careful!"

Owen Davies made no answer. Crouched there upon the ground he rocked
himself to and fro, and moaned in the madness of his baulked desire.

"This man," said Geoffrey, turning towards and pointing to Elizabeth,
who was glaring at him like a wild cat from the corner of the room,
"said that there is no God. I say that there is a God, and that one
day, soon or late, vengeance will find you out--you murderess, you
writer of anonymous letters; you who, to advance your own wicked ends
whatever they may be, were not ashamed to try to drag your innocent
sister's name into the dirt. I never believed in a hell till now, but
there must be a hell for such as you, Elizabeth Granger. Go your ways;
live out your time; but live every hour of it in terror of the
vengeance that shall come so surely as you shall die.

"Now for you, sir," he went on, addressing the trembling father. "I do
not blame you so much, because I believe that this viper poisoned your
mind. You might have thought that the tale was true. It is not true;
it was a lie. Beatrice, who now is dead, came into my room in her
sleep, and was carried from it as she came. And you, her father,
allowed this villain and your daughter to use her distress against
her; you allowed him to make a lever of it, with which to force her
into a marriage that she loathed. Yes, cover up your face--you may
well do so. Do your worst, one and all of you, but remember that this
time you have to deal with a man who can and will strike back, not a
poor friendless girl."

"Before Heaven, it was not my fault, Mr. Bingham," gasped the old man.
"I am innocent of it. That Judas-woman Elizabeth betrayed her sister
because she wanted to marry him herself," and he pointed to the Heap
upon the floor. "She thought that it would prejudice him against
Beatrice, and he--he believed that she was attached to you, and tried
to work upon her attachment."

"So," said Geoffrey, "now we have it all. And you, sir, stood by and
saw this done. You stood by thinking that you would make a profit of
her agony. Now I will tell you what I meant to hide from you. I did
love her. I do love her--as she loved me. I believe that between you,
you drove her to her grave. Her blood be on your heads for ever and
for ever!"

"Oh, take me home," groaned the Heap upon the floor--"take me home,
Elizabeth! I daren't go alone. Beatrice will haunt me. My brain goes
round and round. Take me away, Elizabeth, and stop with me. You are
not afraid of her, you are afraid of nothing."

Elizabeth sidled up to him, keeping her fierce eyes on Geoffrey all
the time. She was utterly cowed and terrified, but she could still
look fierce. She took the Heap by the hand and drew him thence still
moaning and quite crazed. She led him away to his castle and his
wealth. Six months afterwards she came forth with him to marry him,
half-witted as he was. A year and eight months afterwards she came out
again to bury him, and found herself the richest widow in Wales.



They went forth, leaving Geoffrey and Mr. Granger alone. The old man
rested his head upon the table and wept bitterly.

"Be merciful," he said, "do not say such words to me. I loved her,
indeed I did, but Elizabeth was too much for me, and I am so poor. Oh,
if you loved her also, be merciful! I do not reproach you because you
loved her, although you had no right to love her. If you had not loved
her, and made her love you, all this would never have happened. Why do
you say such dreadful things to me, Mr. Bingham?"

"I loved her, sir," answered Geoffrey, humbly enough now that his fury
had passed, "because being what she was all who looked on her must
love her. There is no woman left like her in the world. But who am I
that I should blame you? God forgive us all! I only live henceforth in
the hope that I may one day rejoin her where she has gone."

There was a pause.

"Mr. Granger," said Geoffrey presently, "never trouble yourself about
money. You were her father; anything you want and what I have is
yours. Let us shake hands and say good-bye, and let us never meet
again. As I said, God forgive us all!"

"Thank you--thank you," said the old man, looking up through the white
hair that fell about his eyes. "It is a strange world and we are all
miserable sinners. I hope there is a better somewhere. I'm well-nigh
tired of this, especially now that Beatrice has gone. Poor girl, she
was a good daughter and a fine woman. Good-bye. Good-bye!"

Then Geoffrey went.



                             CHAPTER XXXI

                          THE DUCHESS'S BALL

Geoffrey reached Town a little before eleven o'clock that night--a
haunted man--haunted for life by a vision of that face still lovely in
death, floating alone upon the deep, and companioned only by the
screaming mews--or perchance now sinking or sunk to an unfathomable
grave. Well might such a vision haunt a man, the man whom alone of all
men those cold lips had kissed, and for whose dear sake this dreadful
thing was done.

He took a cab directing the driver to go to Bolton Street and to stop
at his club as he passed. There might be letters for him there, he
thought--something which would distract his mind a little. As it
chanced there was a letter, marked "private," and a telegram; both had
been delivered that evening, the porter said, the former about an hour
ago by hand.

Idly he opened the telegram--it was from his lawyers: "Your cousin,
the child George Bingham, is, as we have just heard, dead. Please call
on us early to-morrow morning."

He started a little, for this meant a good deal to Geoffrey. It meant
a baronetcy and eight thousand a year, more or less. How delighted
Honoria would be, he thought with a sad smile; the loss of that large
income had always been a bitter pill to her, and one which she had
made him swallow again and again. Well, there it was. Poor boy, he had
always been ailing--an old man's child!

He put the telegram in his pocket and got into the hansom again. There
was a lamp in it and by its light he read the letter. It was from the
Prime Minister and ran thus:

 "My dear Bingham,--I have not seen you since Monday to thank you
  for the magnificent speech you made on that night. Allow me to add
  my congratulations to those of everybody else. As you know, the
  Under Secretaryship of the Home Office is vacant. On behalf of my
  colleagues and myself I write to ask if you will consent to fill
  it for a time, for we do not in any way consider that the post is
  one commensurate with your abilities. It will, however, serve to
  give you practical experience of administration, and us the
  advantage of your great talents to an even larger extent than we
  now enjoy. For the future, it must of course take care of itself;
  but, as you know, Sir ----'s health is not all that could be
  desired, and the other day he told me that it was doubtful if he
  would be able to carry on the duties of the Attorney-Generalship
  for very much longer. In view of this contingency I venture to
  suggest that you would do well to apply for silk as soon as
  possible. I have spoken to the Lord Chancellor about it, and he
  says that there will be no difficulty, as although you have only
  been in active practice for so short a while, you have a good many
  years' standing as a barrister. Or if this prospect does not
  please doubtless some other opening to the Cabinet can be found in
  time. The fact is, that we cannot in our own interest overlook you
  for long."

Geoffrey smiled again as he finished this letter. Who could have
believed a year ago that he would have been to-day in a position to
receive such an epistle from the Prime Minister of England? Ah, here
was the luck of the Drowned One's shoe with a vengeance. And what was
it all worth to him now?

He put the letter in his pocket with the telegram and looked out. They
were turning into Bolton Street. How was little Effie, he wondered?
The child seemed all that was left him to care for. If anything
happened to her--bah, he would not think of it!

He was there now. "How is Miss Effie?" he asked of the servant who
opened the door. At that moment his attention was attracted by the dim
forms of two people, a man and a woman, who were standing not far from
the area gate, the man with his arm round the woman's waist. Suddenly
the woman appeared to catch sight of the cab and retired swiftly down
the area. It crossed his mind that her figure was very like that of
Anne, the French nurse.

"Miss Effie is doing nicely, sir, I'm told," answered the man.

Geoffrey breathed more freely. "Where is her ladyship?" he asked. "In
Effie's room?"

"No, sir," answered the man, "her ladyship has gone to a ball. She
left this note for you in case you should come in."

He took the note from the hall table and opened it.

 "Dear Geoffrey," it ran, "Effie is so much better that I have made
  up my mind to go to the duchess's ball after all. She would be so
  disappointed if I did not come, and my dress is quite /lovely/.
  Had your mysterious business anything to do with /Bryngelly/?--
  Yours, Honoria."

"She would go on to a ball from her mother's funeral," said Geoffrey
to himself, as he walked up to Effie's room; "well, it is her nature
and there's an end of it."

He knocked at the door of Effie's room. There was no answer, so he
walked in. The room was lit but empty--no, not quite! On the floor,
clothed only in her white night-shirt, lay his little daughter, to all
appearance dead.

With something like an oath he sprang to her and lifted her. The face
was pale and the small hands were cold, but the breast was still hot
and fevered, and the heart beat. A glance showed him what had
happened. The child being left alone, and feeling thirsty, had got out
of bed and gone to the water bottle--there was the tumbler on the
floor. Then weakness had overcome her and she had fainted--fainted
upon the cold floor with the inflammation still on her.

At that moment Anne entered the room sweetly murmuring, "Ça va bien,
chérie?"

"Help me to put the child into bed," said Geoffrey sternly. "Now ring
the bell--ring it again.

"And now, woman--go. Leave this house at once, this very night. Do you
hear me? No, don't stop to argue. Look here! If that child dies I will
prosecute you for manslaughter; yes, I saw you in the street," and he
took a step towards her. Then Anne fled, and her face was seen no more
in Bolton Street or indeed in this country.

"James," said Geoffrey to the servant, "send the cook up here--she is
a sensible woman; and do you take a hansom and drive to the doctor,
and tell him to come here at once, and if you cannot find him go for
another doctor. Then go to the Nurses' Home, near St. James' Station,
and get a trained nurse--tell them one must be had from somewhere
instantly."

"Yes, sir. And shall I call for her ladyship at the duchess's, sir?"

"No," he answered, frowning heavily, "do not disturb her ladyship. Go
now."

"That settles it," said Geoffrey, as the man went. "Whatever happens,
Honoria and I must part. I have done with her."

He had indeed, though not in the way he meant. It would have been well
for Honoria if her husband's contempt had not prevented him from
summoning her from her pleasure.

The cook came up, and between them they brought the child back to
life.

She opened her eyes and smiled. "Is that you, daddy," she whispered,
"or do I dreams?"

"Yes, dear, it is I."

"Where has you been, daddy--to see Auntie Beatrice?"

"Yes, love," he said, with a gasp.

"Oh, daddy, my head do feel funny; but I don't mind now you is come
back. You won't go away no more, will you, daddy?"

"No, dear, no more."

After that she began to wander a little, and finally dropped into a
troubled sleep.

Within half an hour both the doctor and the nurse arrived. The former
listened to Geoffrey's tale and examined the child.

"She may pull through it," he said, "she has got a capital
constitution; but I'll tell you what it is--if she had lain another
five minutes in that draught there would have been an end of her. You
came in the nick of time. And now if I were you I should go to bed.
You can do no good here, and you look dreadfully ill yourself."

But Geoffrey shook his head. He said he would go downstairs and smoke
a pipe. He did not want to go to bed at present; he was too tired.



Meanwhile the ball went merrily. Lady Honoria never enjoyed herself
more in her life. She revelled in the luxurious gaiety around her like
a butterfly in the sunshine. How good it all was--the flash of
diamonds, the odour of costly flowers, the homage of well-bred men,
the envy of other women. Oh! it was a delightful world after all--that
is when one did not have to exist in a flat near the Edgware Road. But
Heaven be praised! thanks to Geoffrey's talents, there was an end of
flats and misery. After all, he was not a bad sort of husband, though
in many ways a perfect mystery to her. As for his little weakness for
the Welsh girl, really, provided that there was no scandal, she did
not care twopence about it.

"Yes, I am so glad you admire it. I think it is rather a nice dress,
but then I always say that nobody in London can make a dress like
Madame Jules. Oh, no, Geoffrey did not choose it; he thinks of other
things."

"Well, I'm sure you ought to be proud of him, Lady Honoria," said the
handsome Guardsman to whom she was talking; "they say at mess that he
is one of the cleverest men in England. I only wish I had a fiftieth
part of his brains."

"Oh, please do not become clever, Lord Atleigh; please don't, or I
shall really give you up. Cleverness is all very well, but it isn't
everything, you know. Yes, I will dance if you like, but you must go
slowly; to be quite honest, I am afraid of tearing my lace in this
crush. Why, I declare there is Garsington, my brother, you know," and
she pointed to a small red-haired man who was elbowing his way towards
them. "I wonder what he wants; it is not at all in his line to come to
balls. You know him, don't you? he is always racing horses, like you."

But the Guardsman had vanished. For reasons of his own he did not wish
to meet Garsington. Perhaps he too had been a member of a certain
club.

"Oh, there you are, Honoria," said her brother, "I thought that I
should be sure to find you somewhere in this beastly squash. Look
here, I have something to tell you."

"Good news or bad?" said Lady Honoria, playing with her fan. "If it is
bad, keep it, for I am enjoying myself very much, and I don't want my
evening spoilt."

"Trust you for that, Honoria; but look here, it's jolly good, about as
good as can be for that prig of a husband of yours. What do you think?
that brat of a boy, the son of old Sir Robert Bingham and the cook or
some one, you know, is----"

"Not dead, not dead?" said Honoria in deep agitation.

"Dead as ditch-water," replied his lordship. "I heard it at the club.
There was a lawyer fellow there dining with somebody there, and they
got talking about Bingham, when the lawyer said, 'Oh, he's Sir
Geoffrey Bingham now. Old Sir Robert's heir is dead. I saw the
telegram myself.'"

"Oh, this is almost too good to be true," said Honoria. "Why, it means
eight thousand a year to us."

"I told you it was pretty good," said her brother. "You ought to stand
me a commission out of the swag. At any rate, let's go and drink to
the news. Come on, it is time for supper and I am awfully done. I must
screw myself up."

Lady Honoria took his arm. As they walked down the wide flower-hung
stair they met a very great Person indeed, coming up.

"Ah, Lady Honoria," said the great Person, "I have something to say
that will please you, I think," and he bent towards her, and spoke
very low, then, with a little bow, passed on.

"What is the old boy talking about?" asked her brother.

"Why, what do you think? We are in luck's way to-night. He says that
they are offering Geoffrey the Under Secretaryship of the Home
Office."

"He'll be a bigger prig than ever now," growled Lord Garsington. "Yes,
it is luck though; let us hope it won't turn."

They sat down to supper, and Lord Garsington, who had already been
dining, helped himself pretty freely to champagne. Before them was a
silver candelabra and on each of the candles was fixed a little
painted paper shade. One of them got wrong, and a footman tried to
reach over Lord Garsington's head to put it straight.

"I'll do it," said he.

"No, no; let the man," said Lady Honoria. "Look! it is going to catch
fire!"

"Nonsense," he answered, rising solemnly and reaching his arm towards
the shade. As he touched it, it caught fire; indeed, by touching it he
caused it to catch fire. He seized hold of it, and made an effort to
put it out, but it burnt his fingers.

"Curse the thing!" he said aloud, and threw it from him. It fell
flaming in his sister's dress among the thickest of the filmy laces;
they caught, and instantly two wreathing snakes of fire shot up her.
She sprang from her seat and rushed screaming down the room, an awful
mass of flame!



In ten more minutes Lady Honoria had left this world and its pleasures
to those who still lived to taste them.



An hour passed. Geoffrey still sat brooding heavily over his pipe in
the study in Bolton Street and waiting for Honoria, when a knock came
to his door. The servants had all gone to bed, all except the sick
nurse. He rose and opened it himself. A little red-haired, pale-faced
man staggered in.

"Why, Garsington, is it you? What do you want at this hour?"

"Screw yourself up, Bingham, I've something to tell you," he answered
in a thick voice.

"What is it? another disaster, I suppose. Is somebody else dead?"

"Yes; somebody is. Honoria's dead. Burnt to death at the ball."

"Great God! Honoria burnt to death. I had better go----"

"I advise you not, Bingham. I wouldn't go to the hospital if I were
you. Screw yourself up, and if you can, give me something to drink--
I'm about done--I must screw myself up."



And here we may leave this most fortunate and gifted man. Farewell to
Geoffrey Bingham.



                                ENVOL

Thus, then, did these human atoms work out their destinies, these
little grains of animated dust, blown hither and thither by a breath
which came they knew not whence.

If there be any malicious Principle among the Powers around us that
deigns to find amusement in the futile vagaries of man, well might it
laugh, and laugh again, at the great results of all this scheming, of
all these desires, loves and hates; and if there be any pitiful
Principle, well might it sigh over the infinite pathos of human
helplessness. Owen Davies lost in his own passion; Geoffrey crowned
with prosperity and haunted by undying sorrow; Honoria perishing
wretchedly in her hour of satisfied ambition; Beatrice sacrificing
herself in love and blindness, and thereby casting out her joy.

Oh, if she had been content to humbly trust in the Providence above
her; if she had but left that deed undared for one short week!

But Geoffrey still lived, and the child recovered, after hanging for a
while between life and death, and was left to comfort him. May she
survive to be a happy wife and mother, living under conditions more
favourable to her well-being than those which trampled out the life of
that mistaken woman, the ill-starred, great-souled Beatrice, and broke
her father's heart.



Say--what are we? We are but arrows winged with fears and shot from
darkness into darkness; we are blind leaders of the blind, aimless
beaters of this wintry air; lost travellers by many stony paths ending
in one end. Tell us, you, who have outworn the common tragedy and
passed the narrow way, what lies beyond its gate? You are dumb, or we
cannot hear you speak.



But Beatrice knows to-day!













THE BIRDS
by Aristophanes


[Translator uncredited.  Footnotes have been retained because they
provide the meanings of Greek names, terms and ceremonies and explain
puns and references otherwise lost in translation.  Occasional Greek
words in the footnotes have not been included.  Footnote numbers,
in brackets, start anew at [1] for each piece of dialogue, and each
footnote follows immediately the dialogue to which it refers, labeled
thus: f[1].




INTRODUCTION



'The Birds' differs markedly from all the other Comedies of
Aristophanes which have come down to us in subject and general
conception.  It is just an extravaganza pure and simple--a
graceful, whimsical theme chosen expressly for the sake of the
opportunities it afforded of bright, amusing dialogue, pleasing
lyrical interludes, and charming displays of brilliant stage
effects and pretty dresses. Unlike other plays of the same Author,
there is here apparently no serious political MOTIF underlying
the surface burlesque and buffoonery.

Some critics, it is true, profess to find in it a reference to
the unfortunate Sicilian Expedition, then in progress, and a
prophecy of its failure and the political downfall of Alcibiades.
But as a matter of fact, the whole thing seems rather an attempt
on the dramatist's part to relieve the overwrought minds of his fellow-
citizens, anxious and discouraged at the unsatisfactory reports
from before Syracuse, by a work conceived in a lighter vein
than usual and mainly unconnected with contemporary realities.
The play was produced in the year 414 B.C., just when success or
failure in Sicily hung in the balance, though already the outlook
was gloomy, and many circumstances pointed to impending
disaster. Moreover, the public conscience was still shocked and
perturbed over the mysterious affair of the mutilation of the
Hermae, which had occurred immediately before the sailing
of the fleet, and strongly suspicious of Alcibiades' participation
in the outrage. In spite of the inherent charm of the subject,
the splendid outbursts of lyrical poetry in some of the choruses and
the beauty of the scenery and costumes, 'The Birds' failed to
win the first prize. This was acclaimed to a play of Aristophanes'
rival, Amipsias, the title of which, 'The Comastoe,' or 'Revellers,'
"seems to imply that the chief interest was derived from direct
allusions to the outrage above mentioned and to the individuals
suspected to have been engaged in it."

For this reason, which militated against its immediate success,
viz. the absence of direct allusion to contemporary politics--
there are, of course, incidental references here and there to
topics and personages of the day--the play appeals perhaps
more than any other of our Author's productions to the modern
reader. Sparkling wit, whimsical fancy, poetic charm, are of all
ages, and can be appreciated as readily by ourselves as by
an Athenian audience of two thousand years ago, though, of course,
much is inevitably lost "without the important adjuncts
of music, scenery, dresses and what we may call 'spectacle' generally,
which we know in this instance to have been on the most
magnificent scale."

The plot is this. Euelpides and Pisthetaerus, two old Athenians,
disgusted with the litigiousness, wrangling and sycophancy of
their countrymen, resolve upon quitting Attica. Having heard
of the fame of Epops (the hoopoe), sometime called Tereus,
and now King of the Birds, they determine, under the direction
of a raven and a jackdaw, to seek from him and his subject
birds a city free from all care and strife." Arrived at the Palace
of Epops, they knock, and Trochilus (the wren), in a state of
great flutter, as he mistakes them for fowlers, opens the door
and informs them that his Majesty is asleep. When he awakes,
the strangers appear before him, and after listening to a long
and eloquent harangue on the superior attractions of a residence
among the birds, they propose a notable scheme of their own
to further enhance its advantages and definitely secure the
sovereignty of the universe now exercised by the gods of Olympus.

The birds are summoned to meet in general council. They come
flying up from all quarters of the heavens, and after a brief mis-
understanding, during which they come near tearing the two
human envoys to pieces, they listen to the exposition of the latters'
plan. This is nothing less than the building of a new city,
to be called Nephelococcygia, or 'Cloud-cuckoo-town,' between
earth and heaven, to be garrisoned and guarded by the birds in
such a way as to intercept all communication of the gods with
their worshippers on earth. All steam of sacrifice will be prevented
from rising to Olympus, and the Immortals will very
soon be starved into an acceptance of any terms proposed.
The new Utopia is duly constructed, and the daring plan to secure
the sovereignty is in a fair way to succeed. Meantime various quacks
and charlatans, each with a special scheme for improving things,
arrive from earth, and are one after the other exposed and dismissed.
Presently arrives Prometheus, who informs Epops of the desperate straits
to which the gods are by this time reduced, and advises him to push
his claims and demand the hand of Basileia (Dominion), the handmaid
of Zeus. Next an embassy from the Olympians appears on the scene,
consisting of Heracles, Posidon and a god from the savage regions
of the Triballians. After some disputation, it is agreed
that all reasonable demands of the birds are to be granted, while
Pisthetaerus is to have Basileia as his bride. The comedy winds
up with the epithalamium in honour of the nuptials.



DRAMATIS PERSONAE

EUELPIDES
PISTHETAERUS
EPOPS (the Hoopoe)
TROCHILUS, Servant to Epops
PHOENICOPTERUS
HERALDS
A PRIEST
A POET
A PROPHET
METON, a Geometrician
A COMMISSIONER
A DEALER IN DECREES
IRIS
A PARRICIDE
CINESIAS, a Dithyrambic Bard
AN INFORMER
PROMETHEUS
POSIDON
TRIBALLUS
HERACLES
SLAVES OF PISTHETAERUS
MESSENGERS
CHORUS OF BIRDS




SCENE: A wild, desolate tract of open country; broken rocks
and brushwood occupy the centre of the stage.



EUELPIDES (TO HIS JAY)[1]
Do you think I should walk straight for yon tree?

f[1] Euelpides is holding a jay and Pisthetaerus a crow; they are
the guides who are to lead them to the kingdom of the birds.

PISTHETAERUS (TO HIS CROW)
Cursed beast, what are you croaking to me?...to retrace my steps?

EUELPIDES
Why, you wretch, we are wandering at random, we are exerting
ourselves only to return to the same spot; 'tis labour lost.

PISTHETAERUS
To think that I should trust to this crow, which has made me cover
more than a thousand furlongs!

EUELPIDES
And that I to this jay, which has torn every nail from my fingers!

PISTHETAERUS
If only I knew where we were....

EUELPIDES
Could you find your country again from here?

PISTHETAERUS
No, I feel quite sure I could not, any more than could
Execestides[1] find his.

f[1] A stranger who wanted to pass as an Athenian, although coming
originally for a far-away barbarian country.

EUELPIDES
Oh dear! oh dear!

PISTHETAERUS
Aye, aye, my friend, 'tis indeed the road of "oh dears" we are
following.

EUELPIDES
That Philocrates, the bird-seller, played us a scurvy trick,
when he pretended these two guides could help us to find Tereus,[1]
the Epops, who is a bird, without being born of one.  He has
indeed sold us this jay, a true son of Tharelides,[2] for
an obolus, and this crow for three, but what can they do?  Why,
nothing whatever but bite and scratch! --What's the matter with you
then, that you keep opening your beak?  Do you want us to fling
ourselves headlong down these rocks?  There is no road that way.

f[1] A king of Thrace, a son of Ares, who married Procne, the daughter
of Pandion, King of Athens, whom he had assisted against the Megarians.
He violated his sister-in-law, Philomela, and then cut out her
tongue; she nevertheless managed to convey to her sister how she had
been treated.  They both agreed to kill Itys, whom Procne had borne
to Tereus, and dished up the limbs of his own son to the father;
at the end of the meal Philomela appeared and threw the child's head
upon the table.  Tereus rushed with drawn sword upon the princesses,
but all the actors in this terrible scene were metamorph[o]sed.  Tereus
became an Epops (hoopoe), Procne a swallow, Philomela a nightingale,
and Itys a goldfinch.  According to Anacreon and Apollodorus it was
Procne who became the nightingale and Philomela the swallow, and this
is the version of the tradition followed by Aristophanes.
f[2] An Athenian who had some resemblance to a jay--so says
the scholiast, at any rate.

PISTHETAERUS
Not even the vestige of a track in any direction.

EUELPIDES
And what does the crow say about the road to follow?

PISTHETAERUS
By Zeus, it no longer croaks the same thing it did.

EUELPIDES
And which way does it tell us to go now?

PISTHETAERUS
It says that, by dint of gnawing, it will devour my fingers.

EUELPIDES
What misfortune is ours! we strain every nerve to get to the birds,[1]
do everything we can to that end, and we cannot find our way!
Yes, spectators, our madness is quite different from that of Sacas.
He is not a citizen, and would fain be one at any cost; we, on the
contrary, born of an honourable tribe and family and living in the midst
of our fellow-citizens, we have fled from our country as hard as ever
we could go. 'Tis not that we hate it; we recognize it to be great
and rich, likewise that everyone has the right to ruin himself; but
the crickets only chirrup among the fig-trees for a month or two,
whereas the Athenians spend their whole lives in chanting forth
judgments from their law-courts.[2] That is why we started off
with a basket, a stew-pot and some myrtle boughs[3] and have come
to seek a quiet country in which to settle. We are going to Tereus,
the Epops, to learn from him, whether, in his aerial flights,
he has noticed some town of this kind.

f[1] Literally, 'to go to the crows,' a proverbial expression
equivalent to our 'going to the devil.'
f[2] They leave Athens because of their hatred of lawsuits and informers;
this is the especial failing of the Athenians satirized in 'The Wasps.'
f[3] Myrtle boughs were used in sacrifices, and the founding of every
colony was started by a sacrifice.

PISTHETAERUS
Here! look!

EUELPIDES
What's the matter?

PISTHETAERUS
Why, the crow has been pointing me to something up there for some
time now.

EUELPIDES
And the jay is also opening its beak and craning its neck to show
me I know not what.  Clearly, there are some birds about here.
We shall soon know, if we kick up a noise to start them.

PISTHETAERUS
Do you know what to do?  Knock your leg against this rock.

EUELPIDES
And you your head to double the noise.

PISTHETAERUS
Well then use a stone instead; take one and hammer with it.

EUELPIDES
Good idea!  Ho there, within! Slave! slave!

PISTHETAERUS
What's that, friend! You say, "slave," to summon Epops! It would
be much better to shout, "Epops, Epops!"

EUELPIDES
Well then, Epops! Must I knock again?  Epops!

TROCHILUS
Who's there?  Who calls my master?

PISTHETAERUS
Apollo the Deliverer! what an enormous beak![1]

f[1] The actors wore masks made to resemble the birds they were supposed
to represent.

TROCHILUS
Good god! they are bird-catchers.

EUELPIDES
The mere sight of him petrifies me with terror. What a horrible monster.

TROCHILUS
Woe to you!

EUELPIDES
But we are not men.

TROCHILUS
What are you, then?

EUELPIDES
I am the Fearling, an African bird.

TROCHILUS
You talk nonsense.

EUELPIDES
Well, then, just ask it of my feet.[1]

f[1] Fear had had disastrous effects upon Euelpides' internal 
economy, and this his feet evidenced.

TROCHILUS
And this other one, what bird is it?

PISTHETAERUS
I?  I am a Cackling,[1] from the land of the pheasants.

f[1] The same mishap had occurred to Pisthetaerus.

EUELPIDES
But you yourself, in the name of the gods! what animal are you?

TROCHILUS
Why, I am a slave-bird.

EUELPIDES
Why, have you been conquered by a cock?

TROCHILUS
No, but when my master was turned into a peewit, he begged me to
become a bird too, to follow and to serve him.

EUELPIDES
Does a bird need a servant, then?

TROCHILUS
'Tis no doubt because he was a man.  At times he wants to eat a dish
of loach from Phalerum; I seize my dish and fly to fetch him some.
Again he wants some pea-soup; I seize a ladle and a pot and run
to get it.

EUELPIDES
This is, then, truly a running-bird.[1]  Come, Trochilus, do us the
kindness to call your master.

f[1] The Greek word for a wren is derived from the same root as 'to run.'

TROCHILUS
Why, he has just fallen asleep after a feed of myrtle-berries
and a few grubs.

EUELPIDES
Never mind; wake him up.

TROCHILUS
I an certain he will be angry.  However, I will wake him to please
you.

PISTHETAERUS
You cursed brute! why, I am almost dead with terror!

EUELPIDES
Oh! my god! 'twas sheer fear that made me lose my jay.

PISTHETAERUS
Ah! you great coward! were you so frightened that you let go your jay?

EUELPIDES
And did you not lose your crow, when you fell sprawling on the ground?
Pray tell me that.

PISTHETAERUS
No, no.

EUELPIDES
Where is it, then?

PISTHETAERUS
It has flown away.

EUELPIDES
Then you did not let it go?  Oh! you brave fellow!

EPOPS
Open the forest,[1] that I may go out!

f[1] No doubt there was some scenery to represent a forest.  Besides,
there is a pun intended.  The words answering for 'forests' and 'door'
in Greek only differ slightly in sound.

EUELPIDES
By Heracles! what a creature! what plumage! What means this triple crest?

EPOPS
Who wants me?

EUELPIDES
The twelve great gods have used you ill, meseems.

EPOPS
Are you chaffing me about my feathers?  I have been a man, strangers.

EUELPIDES
'Tis not you we are jeering at.

EPOPS
At what, then?

EUELPIDES
Why, 'tis your beak that looks so odd to us.

EPOPS
This is how Sophocles outrages me in his tragedies.  Know, I once
was Tereus.[1]

f[1] Sophocles had written a tragedy about Tereus, in which, no doubt,
the king finally appears as a hoopoe.

EUELPIDES
You were Tereus, and what are you now? a bird or a peacock?[1]

f[1] [O]ne would expect the question to be "bird or man." --Are you
a peacock?  The hoopoe resembles the peacock inasmuch as both have crests.

EPOPS
I am a bird.

EUELPIDES
Then where are your feathers?  For I don't see them.

EPOPS
They have fallen off.

EUELPIDES
Through illness?

EPOPS
No.  All birds moult their feathers, you know, every winter,
and others grow in their place.  But tell me, who are you?

EUELPIDES
We?  We are mortals.

EPOPS
 From what country?

EUELPIDES
 From the land of the beautiful galleys.[1]

f[1] Athens.

EPOPS
Are you dicasts?[1]

f[1] The Athenians were madly addicted to lawsuits. (See 'The Wasps.')

EUELPIDES
No, if anything, we are anti-dicasts.

EPOPS
Is that kind of seed sown among you?[1]

f[1] As much as to say, 'Then you have such things as anti-dicasts?' 
And Euelpides practically replaces, 'Very few.'

EUELPIDES
You have to look hard to find even a little in our fields.

EPOPS
What brings you here?

EUELPIDES
We wish to pay you a visit.

EPOPS
What for?

EUELPIDES
Because you formerly were a man, like we are, formerly you had
debts, as we have, formerly you did not want to pay them, like
ourselves; furthermore, being turned into a bird, you have when flying
seen all lands and seas.  Thus you have all human knowledge as well
as that of birds.  And hence we have come to you to beg you to direct
us to some cosy town, in which one can repose as if on thick coverlets.

EPOPS
And are you looking for a greater city than Athens?

EUELPIDES
No, not a greater, but one more pleasant to dwell in.

EPOPS
Then you are looking for an aristocratic country.

EUELPIDES
I?  Not at all!  I hold the son of Scellias in horror.[1]

f[1] His name was Aristocrates; he was a general and commanded
a fleet sent in aid of Corcyra.

EPOPS
But, after all, what sort of city would please you best?

EUELPIDES
A place where the following would be the most important
business transacted. --Some friend would come knocking at the door
quite early in the morning saying, "By Olympian Zeus, be at my house
early, as soon as you have bathed, and bring your children too.  I am
giving a nuptial feast, so don't fail, or else don't cross my threshold
when I am in distress."

EPOPS
Ah! that's what may be called being fond of hardships!  And what say you?

PISTHETAERUS
My tastes are similar.

EPOPS
And they are?

PISTHETAERUS
I want a town where the father of a handsome lad will stop in the street
and say to me reproachfully as if I had failed him, "Ah! Is this well done,
Stilbonides!  You met my son coming from the bath after the gymnasium
and you neither spoke to him, nor embraced him, nor took him with you,
nor ever once twitched his parts.  Would anyone call you an old 
friend of mine?"

EPOPS
Ah! wag, I see you are fond of suffering.  But there is a city of
delights, such as you want.  'Tis on the Red Sea.

EUELPIDES
Oh, no.  Not a sea-port, where some fine morning the Salaminian[1]
galley can appear, bringing a writ-server along.  Have you no Greek town
you can propose to us?

f[1] The State galley, which carried the officials of the Athenian
republic to their several departments and brought back those whose time
had expired; it was this galley that was sent to Sicily to fetch back
Alcibiades, who was accused of sacrilege.

EPOPS
Why not choose Lepreum in Elis for your settlement?

EUELPIDES
By Zeus! I could not look at Lepreum without disgust, because of
Melanthius.[1]

f[1] A tragic poet, who was a leper; there is a play, of course,
on the word Lepreum.

EPOPS
Then, again, there is the Opuntian, where you could live.

EUELPIDES
I would not be Opuntian[1] for a talent.  But come, what is it like
to live with the birds?  You should know pretty well.

f[1] An allusion to Opuntius, who was one-eyed.

EPOPS
Why, 'tis not a disagreeable life.  In the first place, one has no purse.

EUELPIDES
That does away with much roguery.

EPOPS
For food the gardens yield us white sesame, myrtle-berries,
poppies and mint.

EUELPIDES
Why, 'tis the life of the newly-wed indeed.[1]

f[1] The newly-married ate a sesame-cake, decorated with garlands
of myrtle, poppies and mint.

PISTHETAERUS
Ha! I am beginning to see a great plan, which will transfer the
supreme power to the birds, if you will but take my advice.

EPOPS
Take your advice?  In what way?

PISTHETAERUS
In what way?  Well, firstly, do not fly in all directions with open
beak; it is not dignified.  Among us, when we see a thoughtless man,
we ask, "What sort of bird is this?" and Teleas answers, "'Tis a man
who has no brain, a bird that has lost his head, a creature you cannot
catch, for it never remains in any one place."

EPOPS
By Zeus himself! your jest hits the mark.  What then is to be done?

PISTHETAERUS
Found a city.

EPOPS
We birds?  But what sort of city should we build?

PISTHETAERUS
Oh, really, really! 'tis spoken like a fool!  Look down.

EPOPS
I am looking.

PISTHETAERUS
Now look upwards.

EPOPS
I am looking.

PISTHETAERUS
Turn your head round.

EPOPS
Ah! 'twill be pleasant for me, if I end in twisting my neck!

PISTHETAERUS
What have you seen?

EPOPS
The clouds and the sky.

PISTHETAERUS
Very well! is not this the pole of the birds then?

EPOPS
How their pole?

PISTHETAERUS
Or, if you like it, the land.  And since it turns and passes through
the whole universe, it is called, 'pole.'[1]  If you build and
fortify it, you will turn your pole into a fortified city.[2]
In this way you will reign over mankind as you do over the grasshoppers
and cause the gods to die of rabid hunger

f[1] From [the word meaning] 'to turn.'
f[2] The Greek words for 'pole' and 'city' only differ by
a single letter.

EPOPS
How so?

PISTHETAERUS
The air is 'twixt earth and heaven.  When we want to go to Delphi,
we ask the Boeotians[1] for leave of passage; in the same way, when men
sacrifice to the gods, unless the latter pay you tribute, you exercise
the right of every nation towards strangers and don't allow
the smoke of the sacrifices to pass through your city and territory.

f[1] Boeotia separated Attica from Phocis.

EPOPS
By earth! by snares! by network![1] I never heard of anything
more cleverly conceived; and, if the other birds approve, I am going
to build the city along with you.

f[1] He swears by the powers that are to him dreadful.

PISTHETAERUS
Who will explain the matter to them?

EPOPS
You must yourself.  Before I came they were quite ignorant, but
since I have lived with them I have taught them to speak.

PISTHETAERUS
But how can they be gathered together?

EPOPS
Easily.  I will hasten down to the coppice to waken my dear Procne![1]
as soon as they hear our voices, they will come to us hot wing.

f[1] As already stated, according to the legend accepted by Aristophanes,
it was Procne who was turned into the  nightengale.

PISTHETAERUS
My dear bird, lose no time, I beg.  Fly at once into the coppice
and awaken Procne.

EPOPS
Chase off drowsy sleep, dear companion.  Let the sacred hymn gush
from thy divine throat in melodious strains; roll forth in soft
cadence your refreshing melodies to bewail the fate of Itys,[1] which
has been the cause of so many tears to us both.  Your pure notes rise
through the thick leaves of the yew-tree right up to the throne of Zeus,
where Phoebus listens to you, Phoebus with his golden hair.
And his ivory lyre responds to your plaintive accents; he gathers
the choir of the gods and from their immortal lips rushes a sacred chant
of blessed voices. (THE FLUTE IS PLAYED BEHIND THE SCENE.)

f[1] The son of Tereus and Procne.

PISTHETAERUS
Oh! by Zeus! what a throat that little bird possesses.  He has filled
the whole coppice with honey-sweet melody!

EUELPIDES
Hush!

PISTHETAERUS
What's the matter?

EUELPIDES
Will you keep silence?

PISTHETAERUS
What for?

EUELPIDES
Epops is going to sing again.

EPOPS (IN THE COPPICE)
Epopoi poi popoi, epopoi, popoi, here, here, quick, quick, quick,
my comrades in the air; all you who pillage the fertile lands
of the husbandmen, the numberless tribes who gather and devour
the barley seeds, the swift flying race who sing so sweetly.
And you whose gentle twitter resounds through the fields
with the little cry of tio, tio, tio, tio, tio, tio, tio, tio;
and you who hop about the branches of the ivy in the gardens;
the mountain birds, who feed on the wild olive berries or the arbutus,
hurry to come at my call, trioto, trioto, totobrix; you also, who snap up
the sharp-stinging gnats in the marshy vales, and you who dwell
in the fine plain of Marathon, all damp with dew, and you, the francolin
with speckled wings; you too, the halcyons, who flit over the swelling
waves of the sea, come hither to hear the tidings; let all the tribes
of long-necked birds assemble here; know that a clever old man has come
to us, bringing an entirely new idea and proposing great reforms.
Let all come to the debate here, here, here, here.  Torotorotorotorotix,
kikkobau, kikkobau, torotorotorotorolililix.

PISTHETAERUS
Can you see any bird?

EUELPIDES
By Phoebus, no! and yet I am straining my eyesight to scan the sky.

PISTHETAERUS
'Twas really not worth Epops' while to go and bury himself in the
thicket like a plover when a-hatching.

PHOENICOPTERUS
Torotina, torotina.

PISTHETAERUS
Hold, friend, here is another bird.

EUELPIDES
I' faith, yes, 'tis a bird, but of what kind?  Isn't it a peacock?

PISTHETAERUS
Epops will tell us.  What is this bird?

EPOPS
'Tis not one of those you are used to seeing; 'tis a bird from
the marshes.

PISTHETAERUS
Oh! oh! but he is very handsome with his wings as crimson as flame.

EPOPS
Undoubtedly; indeed he is called flamingo.[1]

f[1] An African bird, that comes to the southern countries of Europe, 
to Greece, Italy, and Spain; it is even seen in Provence.

EUELPIDES
Hi! I say! You!

PISTHETAERUS
What are you shouting for?

EUELPIDES
Why, here's another bird.

PISTHETAERUS
Aye, indeed; 'tis a foreign bird too.  What is this bird from beyond
the mountains with a look as solemn as it is stupid?

EPOPS
He is called the Mede.[1]

f[1] Aristophanes amusingly mixes up real birds with people and
individuals, whom he represents in the form of birds; he is
personifying the Medians here.

PISTHETAERUS
The Mede! But, by Heracles, how, if a Mede, has he flown here
without a camel?

EUELPIDES
Here's another bird with a crest.

PISTHETAERUS
Ah! that's curious.  I say, Epops, you are not the only one of your
kind then?

EPOPS
This bird is the son of Philocles, who is the son of Epops;[1] so
that, you see, I am his grandfather; just as one might say,
Hipponicus,[2] the son of Callias, who is the son of Hipponicus.

f[1] Philocles, a tragic poet, had written a tragedy on Tereus,
which was simply a plagiarism of the play of the same name
by Sophocles.  Philocles is the son of Epops, because he got his
inspiration from Sophocles' Tereus, and at the same time is father
to Epops, since he himself produced another Tereus.
f[2] This Hipponicus is probably the orator whose ears Alcibiades
boxed to gain a bet; he was a descendant of Callias, who was famous
for his hatred of Pisistratus.

PISTHETAERUS
Then this bird is Callias!  Why, what a lot of his feathers he
has lost![1]

f[1] This Callias, who must not be confounded with the foe
of Pisistratus, had ruined himself.

EPOPS
That's because he is honest; so the informers set upon him and the
women too pluck out his feathers.

PISTHETAERUS
By Posidon, do you see that many-coloured bird?  What is his name?

EPOPS
This one?  'Tis the glutton.

PISTHETAERUS
Is there another glutton besides Cleonymus?  But why, if he is
Cleonymus, has he not thrown away his crest?[1]  But what is the meaning
of all these crests?  Have these birds come to contend for the double
stadium prize?[2]

f[1] Cleonymus had cast away his shield; he was as great a glutton
as he was a coward.
f[2] A race in which the track had to be circled twice.

EPOPS
They are like the Carians, who cling to the crests of their
mountains for greater safety.[1]

f[1] A people of Asia Minor; when pursued by the Ionians they took
refuge in the mountains.

PISTHETAERUS
Oh, Posidon! do you see what swarms of birds are gathering here?

EUELPIDES
By Phoebus! what a cloud!  The entrance to the stage is no longer
visible, so closely do they fly together.

PISTHETAERUS
Here is the partridge.

EUELPIDES
Faith! there is the francolin.

PISTHETAERUS
There is the poachard.

EUELPIDES
Here is the kingfisher.  And over yonder?

EPOPS
'Tis the barber.

EUELPIDES
What? a bird a barber?

PISTHETAERUS
Why, Sporgilus is one.[1]  Here comes the owl.

f[1] An Athenian barber.

EUELPIDES
And who is it brings an owl to Athens?[1]

f[1] The owl was dedicated to Athene, and being respected at Athens,
it had greatly multiplied. Hence the proverb, 'taking owls to Athens,'
similar to our English 'taking coals to Newcastle.'

PISTHETAERUS
Here is the magpie, the turtle-dove, the swallow, the horned owl,
the buzzard, the pigeon, the falcon, the ring-dove, the cuckoo,
the red-foot, the red-cap, the purple-cap, the kestrel, the diver,
the ousel, the osprey, the woodpecker.

EUELPIDES
Oh! oh! what a lot of birds! what a quantity of blackbirds!
how they scold, how they come rushing up!  What a noise! what a
noise!  Can they be bearing us ill-will?  Oh! there! there! they are
opening their beaks and staring at us.

PISTHETAERUS
Why, so they are.

CHORUS
Popopopopopopopoi.  Where is he who called me?  Where am I to find him?

EPOPS
I have been waiting for you this long while!  I never fail in my
word to my friends.

CHORUS
Titititititititi.  What good thing have you to tell me?

EPOPS
Something that concerns our common safety, and that is just as
pleasant as it is to the purpose.  Two men, who are subtle reasoners,
have come here to seek me.

CHORUS
Where? What? What are you saying?

EPOPS
I say, two old men have come from the abode of men to propose a
vast and splendid scheme to us.

CHORUS
Oh! 'tis a horrible, unheard-of crime!  What are you saying?

EPOPS
Nay! never let my words scare you.

CHORUS
What have you done then?

EPOPS
I have welcomed two men, who wish to live with us.

CHORUS
And you have dared to do that!

EPOPS
Aye, and am delighted at having done so.

CHORUS
Where are they?

EPOPS
In your midst, as I am.

CHORUS
Ah! ah! we are betrayed; 'tis sacrilege!  Our friend, he who picked
up corn-seeds in the same plains as ourselves, has violated our
ancient laws; he has broken the oaths that bind all birds; he has laid
a snare for me, he has handed us over to the attacks of that impious
race which, throughout all time, has never ceased to war against us.
As for this traitorous bird, we will decide his case later, but
the two old men shall be punished forthwith; we are going to tear them
to pieces.

PISTHETAERUS
'Tis all over with us.

EUELPIDES
You are the sole cause of all our trouble.  Why did you bring me
from down yonder?

PISTHETAERUS
To have you with me.

EUELPIDES
Say rather to have me melt into tears.

PISTHETAERUS
Go to! you are talking nonsense.

EUELPIDES
How so?

PISTHETAERUS
How will you be able to cry when once your eyes are pecked out?

CHORUS
Io! io! forward to the attack, throw yourselves upon the foe,
spill his blood; take to your wings and surround them on all sides.
Woe to them! let us get to work with our beaks, let us devour them.
Nothing can save them from our wrath, neither the mountain forests,
nor the clouds that float in the sky, nor the foaming deep.
Come, peck, tear to ribbons.  Where is the chief of the cohort?  Let
him engage the right wing.

EUELPIDES
This is the fatal moment.  Where shall I fly to, unfortunate wretch
that I am?

PISTHETAERUS
Stay! stop here!

EUELPIDES
That they may tear me to pieces?

PISTHETAERUS
And how do you think to escape them?

EUELPIDES
I don't know at all.

PISTHETAERUS
Come, I will tell you.  We must stop and fight them.  Let us arm
ourselves with these stew-pots.

EUELPIDES
Why with the stew-pots?

PISTHETAERUS
The owl will not attack us.[1]

f[1] An allusion to the Feast of Pots; it was kept at Athens
on the third day of the Anthesteria, when all sorts of vegetables
were stewed together and offered for the dead to Bacchus and Athene.
This Feast was peculiar to Athens. --Hence Pisthetaerus thinks that
the owl will recognize they are Athenians by seeing the stew-pots,
and as he is an Athenian bird, he will not attack them.

EUELPIDES
But do you see all those hooked claws?

PISTHETAERUS
Seize the spit and pierce the foe on your side.

EUELPIDES
And how about my eyes?

PISTHETAERUS
Protect them with this dish or this vinegar-pot.

EUELPIDES
Oh! what cleverness! what inventive genius!  You are a great general,
even greater than Nicias,[1] where stratagem is concerned.

f[1] Nicias, the famous Athenian general. --The siege of Melos in 417 
B.C., or two years previous to the production of 'The Birds,' had
especially done him great credit.  He was joint commander of the Sicilian
expedition.

CHORUS
Forward, forward, charge with your beaks! Come, no delay.  Tear,
pluck, strike, flay them, and first of all smash the stew-pot.

EPOPS
Oh, most cruel of all animals, why tear these two men to pieces,
why kill them?  What have they done to you?  They belong to the same
tribe, to the same family as my wife.[1]

f[1] Procne, the daughter of Pandion, King of Athens.

CHORUS
Are wolves to be spared?  Are they not our most mortal foes?  So let
us punish them.

EPOPS
If they are your foes by nature, they are your friends in heart,
and they come here to give you useful advice.

CHORUS
Advice or a useful word from their lips, from them, the enemies of
my forebears!

EPOPS
The wise can often profit by the lessons of a foe, for caution
is the mother of safety.  'Tis just such a thing as one will not learn
from a friend and which an enemy compels you to know.  To begin with,
'tis the foe and not the friend that taught cities to build high
walls, to equip long vessels of war; and 'tis this knowledge that
protects our children, our slaves and our wealth.

CHORUS
Well then, I agree, let us first hear them, for 'tis best;
one can even learn something in an enemy's school.

PISTHETAERUS
Their wrath seems to cool.  Draw back a little.

EPOPS
'Tis only justice, and you will thank me later.

CHORUS
Never have we opposed your advice up to now.

PISTHETAERUS
They are in a more peaceful mood; put down your stew-pot and
your two dishes; spit in hand, doing duty for a spear, let us mount
guard inside the camp close to the pot and watch in our arsenal
closely; for we must not fly.

EUELPIDES
You are right.  But where shall we be buried, if we die?

PISTHETAERUS
In the Ceramicus;[1] for, to get a public funeral, we shall tell
the Strategi that we fell at Orneae,[2] fighting the country's foes.

f[1] A space beyond the walls of Athens which contained the gardens
of the Academy and the graves of citizens who had died for their country.
f[2] A town in Western Argolis, where the Athenians had been recently
defeated.  The somewhat similar work in Greek signifies 'birds.'

CHORUS
Return to your ranks and lay down your courage beside your wrath
as the Hoplites do.  Then let us ask these men who they are, whence
they come, and with what intent.  Here, Epops, answer me.

EPOPS
Are you calling me?  What do you want of me?

CHORUS
Who are they?  From what country?

EPOPS
Strangers, who have come from Greece, the land of the wise.

CHORUS
And what fate has led them hither to the land of the birds?

EPOPS
Their love for you and their wish to share your kind of life;
to dwell and remain with you always.

CHORUS
Indeed, and what are their plans?

EPOPS
They are wonderful, incredible, unheard of.

CHORUS
Why, do they think to see some advantage that determines them to
settle here?  Are they hoping with our help to triumph over their
foes or to be useful to their friends?

EPOPS
They speak of benefits so great it is impossible either to describe
or conceive them; all shall be yours, all that we see here, there,
above and below us; this they vouch for.

CHORUS
Are they mad?

EPOPS
They are the sanest people in the world.

CHORUS
Clever men?

EPOPS
The slyest of foxes, cleverness its very self, men of the world,
cunning, the cream of knowing folk.

CHORUS
Tell them to speak and speak quickly; why, as I listen to you,
I am beside myself with delight.

EPOPS
Here, you there, take all these weapons and hang them up inside
close to the fire, near the figure of the god who presides there and
under his protection;[1] as for you, address the birds, tell them why
I have gathered them together.

f[1] Epops is addressing the two slaves, no doubt Xanthias and Manes, 
who are mentioned later on.

PISTHETAERUS
Not I, by Apollo, unless they agree with me as the little ape of
an armourer agreed with his wife, not to bite me, nor pull me by the
parts, nor shove things up my...

CHORUS
You mean the...(PUTS FINGER TO BOTTOM) Oh! be quite at ease.

PISTHETAERUS
No, I mean my eyes.

CHORUS
Agreed.

PISTHETAERUS
Swear it.

CHORUS
I swear it and, if I keep my promise, let judges and spectators
give me the victory unanimously.

PISTHETAERUS
It is a bargain.

CHORUS
And if I break my word, may I succeed by one vote only.

HERALD
Hearken, ye people!  Hoplites, pick up your weapons and return to
your firesides; do not fail to read the decrees of dismissal we have
posted.

CHORUS
Man is a truly cunning creature, but nevertheless explain.  Perhaps
you are going to show me some good way to extend my power, some way
that I have not had the wit to find out and which you have discovered.
Speak! 'tis to your own interest as well as to mine, for if you secure
me some advantage, I will surely share it with you. But what object 
can have induced you to come among us?  Speak boldly, for I shall not 
break
the truce, --until you have told us all.

PISTHETAERUS
I am bursting with desire to speak; I have already mixed the dough
of my address and nothing prevents me from kneading it....  Slave! bring
the chaplet and water, which you must pour over my hands.  Be quick![1]

f[1] It was customary, when speaking in public and also at feasts,
to wear a chaplet; hence the question Euelpides puts. --The guests wore
chaplets of flowers, herbs, and leaves, which had the property of being
refreshing.

EUELPIDES
Is it a question of feasting?  What does it all mean?

PISTHETAERUS
By Zeus, no! but I am hunting for fine, tasty words to break down
the hardness of their hearts. --I grieve so much for you, who
at one time were kings...

CHORUS
We kings!  Over whom?

PISTHETAERUS
...of all that exists, firstly of me and of this man, even of Zeus
himself.  Your race is older than Saturn, the Titans and the Earth.

CHORUS
What, older than the Earth!

PISTHETAERUS
By Phoebus, yes.

CHORUS
By Zeus, but I never knew that before!

PISTHETAERUS
'Tis because you are ignorant and heedless, and have never read
your Aesop.  'Tis he who tells us that the lark was born
before all other creatures, indeed before the Earth; his father died
of sickness, but the Earth did not exist then; he remained unburied
for five days, when the bird in its dilemma decided, for want of
a better place, to entomb its father in its own head.

EUELPIDES
So that the lark's father is buried at Cephalae.[1]

f[1] A deme of Attica.  In Greek the word also means 'heads,'
and hence the pun.

EPOPS
Hence, if we existed before the Earth, before the gods,
the kingship belongs to us by right of priority.

EUELPIDES
Undoubtedly, but sharpen your beak well; Zeus won't be in a hurry
to hand over his sceptre to the woodpecker.

PISTHETAERUS
It was not the gods, but the birds, who were formerly the masters
and kings over men; of this I have a thousand proofs.  First of all,
I will point you to the cock, who governed the Persians before
all other monarchs, before Darius and Megabyzus.[1]  'Tis in memory
of his reign that he is called the Persian bird.

f[1] One of Darius' best generals.  After his expedition against
the Scythians, this prince gave him the command of the army which he
left in Europe.  Megabyzus took Perinthos (afterwards called Heraclea)
and conquered Thrace.

EUELPIDES
For this reason also, even to-day, he alone of all the birds wears
his tiara straight on his head, like the Great King.[1]

f[1] All Persians wore the tiara, but always on one side; the Great King
alone wore it straight on his head.

PISTHETAERUS
He was so strong, so great, so feared, that even now, on account
of his ancient power, everyone jumps out of bed as soon as ever he
crows at daybreak.  Blacksmiths, potters, tanners, shoemakers, bathmen,
corn-dealers, lyre-makers and armourers, all put on their shoes and
go to work before it is daylight.

EUELPIDES
I can tell you something about that.  'Twas the cock's fault
that I lost a splendid tunic of Phrygian wool.  I was at a feast
in town, given to celebrate the birth of a child; I had drunk pretty
freely and had just fallen asleep, when a cock, I suppose in a greater
hurry than the rest, began to crow.  I thought it was dawn and set
out for Alimos.[1]  I had hardly got beyond the walls, when a footpad
struck me in the back with his bludgeon; down I went and wanted
to shout, but he had already made off with my mantle.

f[1] Noted as the birthplace of Thucydides, a deme of Attica of
the tribe of Leontis.  Demosthenes tells us it was thirty-five stadia
from Athens.

PISTHETAERUS
Formerly also the kite was ruler and king over the Greeks.

EPOPS
The Greeks?

PISTHETAERUS
And when he was king, 'twas he who first taught them to fall
on their knees before the kites.[1]

f[1] The appearance of the kite in Greece betokened the return of
springtime; it was therefore worshipped as a symbol of that season.

EUELPIDES
By Zeus! 'tis what I did myself one day on seeing a kite; but
at the moment I was on my knees, and leaning backwards[1] with mouth
agape, I bolted an obolus and was forced to carry my bag home empty.[2]

f[1] To look at the kite, who no doubt was flying high in the sky.
f[2] As already shown, the Athenians were addicted to carrying small
coins in their mouths. --This obolus was for the purpose of buying flour
to fill the bag he was carrying

PISTHETAERUS
The cuckoo was king of Egypt and of the whole of Phoenicia.  When
he called out "cuckoo," all the Phoenicians hurried to the fields to
reap their wheat and their barley.[1]

f[1] In Phoenicia and Egypt the cuckoo makes its appearance about
harvest-time.

EUELPIDES
Hence no doubt the proverb, "Cuckoo! cuckoo! go to the fields,
ye circumcised."[1]

f[1] This was an Egyptian proverb, meaning, 'When the cuckoo sings we
go harvesting.' Both the Phoenicians and the Egyptians practised
circumcision.

PISTHETAERUS
So powerful were the birds that the kings of Grecian cities,
Agamemnon, Menelaus, for instance, carried a bird on the tip of
their sceptres, who had his share of all presents.[1]

f[1] The staff, called a sceptre, generally terminated in a piece
of carved work, representing a flower, a fruit, and most often a bird.

EUELPIDES
That I didn't know and was much astonished when I saw Priam come
upon the stage in the tragedies with a bird, which kept watching
Lysicrates[1] to see if he got any present.

f[1] A general accused of treachery.  The bird watches Lysicrates,
because, according to Pisthetaerus, he had a right to a share
of the presents.

PISTHETAERUS
But the strongest proof of all is, that Zeus, who now reigns, is
represented as standing with an eagle on his head as a symbol of his
royalty;[1] his daughter has an owl, and Phoebus, as his servant, has a
hawk.

f[1] It is thus that Phidias represents his Olympian Zeus.

EUELPIDES
By Demeter, 'tis well spoken.  But what are all these birds doing
in heaven?

PISTHETAERUS
When anyone sacrifices and, according to the rite, offers the entrails
to the gods, these birds take their share before Zeus. Formerly men always
swore by the birds and never by the gods; even now Lampon[1] swears 
by the goose,
when he wants to lie....Thus 'tis clear that you were great and 
sacred, but now you
are looked upon as slaves, as fools, as Helots; stones are thrown
at you as at raving madmen, even in holy places.  A crowd of
bird-catchers sets snares, traps, limed-twigs and nets of all sorts
for you; you are caught, you are sold in heaps and the buyers finger
you over to be certain you are fat.  Again, if they would but serve you
up simply roasted; but they rasp cheese into a mixture of oil, vinegar
and laserwort, to which another sweet and greasy sauce is added,
and the whole is poured scalding hot over your back, for all the world
as if you were diseased meat.

f[1] One of the diviners sent to Sybaris (in Magna Graecia, S. Italy)
with the Athenian colonists, who rebuilt the town under the new name
of Thurium.

CHORUS
Man, your words have made my heart bleed; I have groaned over
the treachery of our fathers, who knew not how to transmit to us the
high rank they held from their forefathers.  But 'tis a benevolent
Genius, a happy Fate, that sends you to us; you shall be our deliverer
and I place the destiny of my little ones and my own in your hands
with every confidence. But hasten to tell me what must be done;
we should not be worthy to live, if we did not seek to regain
our royalty by every possible means.

PISTHETAERUS
First I advise that the birds gather together in one city and that
they build a wall of great bricks, like that at Babylon, round the
plains of the air and the whole region of space that divides earth
from heaven.

EPOPS
Oh, Cebriones! oh, Porphyrion![1] what a terribly strong place!

f[1] As if he were saying, "Oh, gods!"  Like Lampon, he swears by the birds,
instead of swearing by the gods. --The names of these birds are those of two
of the Titans.

PISTHETAERUS
Th[en], this being well done and completed, you demand
back the empire from Zeus; if he will not agree, if he refuses and
does not at once confess himself beaten, you declare a sacred war
against him and forbid the gods henceforward to pass through your
country with lust, as hitherto, for the purpose of fondling
their Alcmenas, their Alopes, or their Semeles![1] if they try to pass
through, you infibulate them with rings so that they can work no
longer.  You send another messenger to mankind, who will proclaim to
them that the birds are kings, that for the future they must first
of all sacrifice to them, and only afterwards to the gods; that it
is fitting to appoint to each deity the bird that has most in common
with it.  For instance, are they sacrificing to Aphrodite, let them
at the same time offer barley to the coot; are they immolating a sheep
to Posidon, let them consecrate wheat in honour of the duck;[2] is a
steer being offered to Heracles, let honey-cakes be dedicated to
the gull;[3] is a goat being slain for King Zeus, there is a
King-Bird, the wren,[4] to whom the sacrifice of a male gnat is due
before Zeus himself even.

f[1] Alcmena, wife of Amphitryon, King of Thebes and mother
of Heracles. --Semele, the daughter of Cadmus and Hermione and mother
of Bacchus; both seduced by Zeus. --Alope, daughter of Cercyon,
a robber, who reigned at Eleusis and was conquered by Perseus. Alope
was honoured with Posidon's caresses; by him she had a son named
Hippothous, at first brought up by shepherds but who afterwards
was restored to the throne of his grandfather by Theseus.
f[2] Because water is the duck's domain, as it is that of Posidon.
f[3] Because the gull, like Heracles, is voracious.
f[4] The Germans still call it 'Zaunkonig' and the French 'roitelet,'
both names thus containing the idea of 'king.'

EUELPIDES
This notion of an immolated gnat delights me! And now let the great
Zeus thunder!

EPOPS
But how will mankind recognize us as gods and not as jays?  Us, who
have wings and fly?

PISTHETAERUS
You talk rubbish! Hermes is a god and has wings and flies, and
so do many other gods.  First of all, Victory flies with golden
wings, Eros is undoubtedly winged too, and Iris is compared by Homer
to a timorous dove.[1]  If men in their blindness do not recognize you
as gods and continue to worship the dwellers in Olympus, then a cloud
of sparrows greedy for corn must descend upon their fields and eat up
all their seeds; we shall see then if Demeter will mete them out
any wheat.

f[1] The scholiast draws our attention to the fact that Homer says this
of Here and not of Iris (Iliad, V, 778); it is only another proof that
the text of Homer has reached us in a corrupted form, or it may be that
Aristophanes was liable, like other people, to occasional mistakes of
quotation.

EUELPIDES
By Zeus, she'll take good care she does not, and you will see
her inventing a thousand excuses.

PISTHETAERUS
The crows too will prove your divinity to them by pecking out
the eyes of their flocks and of their draught-oxen; and then let
Apollo cure them, since he is a physician and is paid for
the purpose.[1]

f[1] In sacrifices.

EUELPIDES
Oh! don't do that! Wait first until I have sold my two young bullocks.

PISTHETAERUS
If on the other hand they recognize that you are God, the principle
of life, that you are Earth, Saturn, Posidon, they shall be loaded
with benefits.

EPOPS
Name me one of these then.

PISTHETAERUS
Firstly, the locusts shall not eat up their vine-blossoms; a legion
of owls and kestrels will devour them.  Moreover, the gnats
and the gall-bugs shall no longer ravage the figs; a flock
of thrushes shall swallow the whole host down to the very last.

EPOPS
And how shall we give wealth to mankind?  This is their strongest
passion.

PISTHETAERUS
When they consult the omens, you will point them to the richest
mines, you will reveal the paying ventures to the diviner, and not
another shipwreck will happen or sailor perish.

EPOPS
No more shall perish?  How is that?

PISTHETAERUS
When the auguries are examined before starting on a voyage, some
bird will not fail to say, "Don't start! there will be a storm,"
or else, "Go! you will make a most profitable venture."

EUELPIDES
I shall buy a trading-vessel and go to sea, I will not stay with
you.

PISTHETAERUS
You will discover treasures to them, which were buried in former
times, for you know them.  Do not all men say, "None knows where my
treasure lies, unless perchance it be some bird."[1]

f[1] An Athenian proverb.

EUELPIDES
I shall sell my boat and buy a spade to unearth the vessels.

EPOPS
And how are we to give them health, which belongs to the gods?

PISTHETAERUS
If they are happy, is not that the chief thing towards health?
The miserable man is never well.

EPOPS
Old Age also dwells in Olympus.  How will they get at it?  Must they
die in early youth?

PISTHETAERUS
Why, the birds, by Zeus, will add three hundred years to their life.

EPOPS
 From whom will they take them?

PISTHETAERUS
 From whom?  Why, from themselves.  Don't you know the cawing crow
lives five times as long as a man?

EUELPIDES
Ah! ah! these are far better kings for us than Zeus!

PISTHETAERUS
Far better, are they not?  And firstly, we shall not have to build
them temples of hewn stone, closed with gates of gold; they will
dwell amongst the bushes and in the thickets of green oak; the most
venerated of birds will have no other temple than the foliage of the
olive tree; we shall not go to Delphi or to Ammon to sacrifice;[1] but
standing erect in the midst of arbutus and wild olives and holding
forth our hands filled with wheat and barley, we shall pray them
to admit us to a share of the blessings they enjoy and shall at once
obtain them for a few grains of wheat.

f[1] A celebrated temple to Zeus in an oasis of Libya.

CHORUS
Old man, whom I detested, you are now to me the dearest of all;
never shall I, if I can help it, fail to follow your advice.
Inspirited by your words, I threaten my rivals the gods, and I
swear that if you march in alliance with me against the gods and are
faithful to our just, loyal and sacred bond, we shall soon have
shattered their sceptre. 'Tis our part to undertake the toil,
'tis yours to advise.

EPOPS
By Zeus! 'tis no longer the time to delay and loiter like
Nicias;[1] let us act as promptly as possible....  In the first place,
come, enter my nest built of brushwood and blades of straw, and tell
me your names.

f[1] Nicias was commander, along with Demosthenes, and later on
Alcibiades, of the Athenian forces before Syracuse, in the ill-fated
Sicilian Expedition, 415-413 B.C.  He was much blamed for dilatoriness
and indecision.

PISTHETAERUS
That is soon done; my name is Pisthetaerus.

EPOPS
And his?

PISTHETAERUS
Euelpides, of the deme of Thria.

EPOPS
Good! and good luck to you.

PISTHETAERUS
We accept the omen.

EPOPS
Come in here.

PISTHETAERUS
Very well, 'tis you who lead us and must introduce us.

EPOPS
Come then.

PISTHETAERUS
Oh! my god! do come back here.  Hi! tell us how we are to follow
you.  You can fly, but we cannot.

EPOPS
Well, well.

PISTHETAERUS
Remember Aesop's fables.  It is told there, that the fox fared
very ill, because he had made an alliance with the eagle.

EPOPS
Be at ease.  You shall eat a certain root and wings will grow on
your shoulders.

PISTHETAERUS
Then let us enter.  Xanthias and Manes,[1] pick up our baggage.

f[1] Servants of Pisthetaerus and Euelpides.

CHORUS
Hi! Epops! do you hear me?

EPOPS
What's the matter?

CHORUS
Take them off to dine well and call your mate, the melodious
Procne, whose songs are worthy of the Muses; she will delight our
leisure moments.

PISTHETAERUS
Oh! I conjure you, accede to their wish; for this delightful
bird will leave her rushes at the sound of your voice; for the sake of
the gods, let her come here, so that we may contemplate the
nightingale.[1]

f[1] It has already been mentioned that, according to the legend followed
by Aristophanes, Procne had been changed into a nightingale and Philomela
into a swallow.

EPOPS
Let is be as you desire.  Come forth, Procne, show yourself to these strangers.

PISTHETAERUS
Oh! great Zeus! what a beautiful little bird! what a dainty
form! what brilliant plumage![1]

f[1] The actor, representing Procne, was dressed out as a courtesan, but wore
a mask of a bird.

EUELPIDES
Do you know how dearly I should like to splint her legs for her?

PISTHETAERUS
She is dazzling all over with gold, like a young girl.[1]

f[1] Young unmarried girls wore golden ornaments; the apparel of married women
was much simpler.

EUELPIDES
Oh! how I should like to kiss her!

PISTHETAERUS
Why, wretched man, she has two little sharp points on her beak!

EUELPIDES
I would treat her like an egg, the shell of which we remove before
eating it; I would take off her mask and then kiss her pretty face.

EPOPS
Let us go in.

PISTHETAERUS
Lead the way, and may success attend us.

CHORUS
Lovable golden bird, whom I cherish above all others, you, whom
I associate with all my songs, nightingale, you have come, you have
come, to show yourself to me and to charm me with your notes.  Come,
you, who play spring melodies upon the harmonious flute,[1] lead off
our anapaests.[2]

Weak mortals, chained to the earth, creatures of clay as frail
as the foliage of the woods, you unfortunate race, whose life is but
darkness, as unreal as a shadow, the illusion of a dream, hearken
to us, who are immortal beings, ethereal, ever young and occupied
with eternal thoughts, for we shall teach you about all celestial
matters; you shall know thoroughly what is the nature of the birds,
what the origin of the gods, of the rivers, of Erebus, and Chaos;
thanks to us, even Prodicus[3] will envy you your knowledge.

At the beginning there was only Chaos, Night, dark Erebus,
and deep Tartarus.  Earth, the air and heaven had no existence.
Firstly, black-winged Night laid a germless egg in the bosom
of the infinite deeps of Erebus, and from this, after the revolution
of long ages, sprang the graceful Eros with his glittering golden wings,
swift as the whirlwinds of the tempest.  He mated in deep Tartarus
with dark Chaos, winged like himself, and thus hatched forth our race,
which was the first to see the light.  That of the Immortals did not
exist until Eros had brought together all the ingredients of the world,
and from their marriage Heaven, Ocean, Earth and the imperishable race
of blessed gods sprang into being.  Thus our origin is very much
older than that of the dwellers in Olympus.  We are the offspring
of Eros; there are a thousand proofs to show it.  We have wings and we
lend assistance to lovers.  How many handsome youths, who had sworn
to remain insensible, have not been vanquished by our power
and have yielded themselves to their lovers when almost at the end
of their youth, being led away by the gift of a quail, a waterfowl,
a goose, or a cock.[4]

And what important services do not the birds render to mortals!
First of all, they mark the seasons for them, springtime, winter,
and autumn.  Does the screaming crane migrate to Libya, --it warns
the husbandman to sow, the pilot to take his ease beside his tiller hung
up in his dwelling,[5] and Orestes[6] to weave a tunic, so that the 
rigorous cold
may not drive him any more to strip other folk. When the kite 
reappears, he tells
of the return of spring and of the period when the fleece of the sheep
must be clipped.  Is the swallow in sight?  All hasten to sell their warm tunic
and to buy some light clothing.  We are your Ammon, Delphi, Dodona, 
your Phoebus
Apollo.[7]  Before undertaking anything, whether a business transaction,
a marriage, or the purchase of food, you consult the birds by reading
the omens, and you give this name of omen[8] to all signs that tell
of the future.  With you a word is an omen, you call a sneeze an omen,
a meeting an omen, an unknown sound an omen, a slave or an ass
an omen.[9]  Is it not clear that we are a prophetic Apollo to you?
If you recognize us as gods, we shall be your divining Muses,
through us you will know the winds and the seasons, summer, winter,
and the temperate months.  We shall not withdraw ourselves
to the highest clouds like Zeus, but shall be among you and shall give
to you and to your children and the children of your children, health
and wealth, long life, peace, youth, laughter, songs and feasts;
in short, you will all be so well off, that you will be weary and
satiated with enjoyment.

Oh, rustic Muse of such varied note, tio, tio, tio, tiotinx, I sing
with you in the groves and on the mountain tops, tio, tio, tio, tio,
tiotinx.[10]  I poured forth sacred strains from my golden throat
in honour of the god Pan,[11] tio, tio, tio, tiotinx, from the top
of the thickly leaved ash, and my voice mingles with the mighty choirs
who extol Cybele on the mountain tops,[12] tototototototototinx.
'Tis to our concerts that Phrynichus comes to pillage like a bee
the ambrosia of his songs, the sweetness of which so charms the ear,
tio, tio, tio, tio, tinx.

If there be one of you spectators who wishes to spend the rest
of his life quietly among the birds, let him come to us.  All that
is disgraceful and forbidden by law on earth is on the contrary
honourable among us, the birds.  For instance, among you 'tis a crime
to beat your father, but with us 'tis an estimable deed; it's
considered fine to run straight at your father and hit him, saying,
"Come, lift your spur if you want to fight."[13]  The runaway slave,
whom you brand, is only a spotted francolin with us.[14]  Are you
Phrygian like Spintharus?[15]  Among us you would be the Phrygian bird,
the goldfinch, of the race of Philemon.[16]  Are you a slave and
a Carian like Execestides?  Among us you can create yourself
fore-fathers;[17] you can always find relations.  Does the son of Pisias
want to betray the gates of the city to the foe?  Let him become
a partridge, the fitting offspring of his father; among us there is
no shame in escaping as cleverly as a partridge.

So the swans on the banks of the Hebrus, tio, tio, tio, tio, tiotinx,
mingle their voices to serenade Apollo, tio, tio, tio, tio. tiotinx,
flapping their wings the while, tio, tio, tio, tio, tiotinx; their notes
reach beyond the clouds of heaven; all the dwellers in the forest stand
still with astonishment and delight; a calm rests upon the waters,
and the Graces and the choirs in Olympus catch up the strain, tio, tio,
tio, tio, tiotinx.

There is nothing more useful nor more pleasant than to have wings.
To begin with, just let us suppose a spectator to be dying with hunger
and to be weary of the choruses of the tragic poets; if he were
winged, he would fly off, go home to dine and come back with his
stomach filled.  Some Patroclides in urgent need would not have to 
soil his cloak, but could fly off, satisfy his requirements, and,
having recovered his breath, return.  If one of you, it matters not who,
had adulterous relations and saw the husband of his mistress
in the seats of the senators, he might stretch his wings, fly thither,
and, having appeased his craving, resume his place.  Is it not
the most priceless gift of all, to be winged?  Look at Diitrephes![18]
His wings were only wicker-work ones, and yet he got himself chosen
Phylarch and then Hipparch; from being nobody, he has risen
to be famous; 'tis now the finest gilded cock of his tribe.[19]

f[1] The actor, representing Procne, was a flute-player.
f[2] The parabasis.
f[3] A sophist of the island of Ceos, a disciple of Protagoras,
as celebrated for his knowledge as for his eloquence.  The Athenians
condemned him to death as a corrupter of youth in 396 B.C.
f[4] Lovers were wont to make each other presents of birds.  The cock
and the goose are mentioned, of course, in jest.
f[5] i.e. that it gave notice of the approach of winter, during which
season the Ancients did not venture to sea.
f[6] A notorious robber.
f[7] Meaning, "We are your oracles."  --Dodona was an oracle in Epirus.
--The temple of Zeus there was surrounded by a dense forest, all
the trees of which were endowed with the gift of prophecy; both
the sacred oaks and the pigeons that lived in them answered
the questions of those who came to consult the oracle in pure Greek.
f[8] The Greek word for 'omen' is the same as that for 'bird.'
f[9] A satire on the passion of the Greeks for seeing an omen
in everything.
f[10] An imitation of the nightingale's song.
f[11] God of the groves and wilds.
f[12] The 'Mother of the Gods'; roaming the mountains, she held dances,
always attended by Pan and his accompanying rout of Fauns and Satyrs.
f[13] An allusion to cock-fighting; the birds are armed with brazen spurs.
f[14] An allusion to the spots on this bird, which resemble the scars
left by a branding iron.
f[15] He was of Asiatic origin, but wished to pass for an Athenian.
f[16] Or Philamnon, King of Thrace; the scholiast remarks that
the Phrygians and the Thracians had a common origin.
f[17] The Greek word here is also the name of a little bird.
f[18] A basket-maker who had become rich. --The Phylarchs were the
headmen of the tribes. They presided at the private assemblies
and were charged with the management of the treasury. --The Hipparchs,
as the name implies, were the leaders of the cavalry; there were
only two of these in the Athenian army.
f[19] He had become a senator.

PISTHETAERUS
Halloa! What's this?  By Zeus! I never saw anything so funny in all
my life.[1]

f[1] Pisthetaerus and Euelpides now both return with wings.

EUELPIDES
What makes you laugh?

PISTHETAERUS
'Tis your bits of wings.  D'you know what you look like?  Like a goose
painted by some dauber-fellow.

EUELPIDES
And you look like a close-shaven blackbird.

PISTHETAERUS
'Tis ourselves asked for this transformation, and, as Aeschylus
has it, "These are no borrowed feathers, but truly our own."[1]

f[1] Meaning, 'tis we who wanted to have these wings. --The verse
from Aeschylus, quoted here, is taken from 'The Myrmidons,' a tragedy
of which only a few fragments remain.

EPOPS
Come now, what must be done?

PISTHETAERUS
First give our city a great and famous name, then sacrifice to the gods.

EUELPIDES
I think so too.

EPOPS
Let's see.  What shall our city be called?

PISTHETAERUS
Will you have a high-sounding Laconian name?  Shall we call it Sparta?

EUELPIDES
What! call my town Sparta?  Why, I would not use esparto for my
bed,[1] even though I had nothing but bands of rushes.

f[1] The Greek word signified the city of Sparta, and also a kind
of broom used for weaving rough matting, which served for the beds
of the very poor.

PISTHETAERUS
Well then, what name can you suggest?

EUELPIDES
Some name borrowed from the clouds, from these lofty regions
in which we dwell--in short, some well-known name.

PISTHETAERUS
Do you like Nephelococcygia?[1]

f[1] A fanciful name constructed from [the word for] a cloud, and
[the word for] a cuckoo; thus a city of clouds and cuckoos.
--'Wolkenkukelheim' is a clever approximation in German.
Cloud-cuckoo-town, perhaps, is the best English equivalent.

EPOPS
Oh! capital! truly 'tis a brilliant thought!

EUELPIDES
Is it in Nephelococcygia that all the wealth of Theovenes[1] and most
of Aeschines'[2] is?

f[1] He was a boaster nicknamed 'smoke,' because he promised
a great deal and never kept his word.
f[2] Also mentioned in 'The Wasps.'

PISTHETAERUS
No, 'tis rather the plain of Phlegra,[1] where the gods withered
the pride of the sons of the Earth with their shafts.

f[1] Because the war of the Titans against the gods was only a fiction
of the poets.

EUELPIDES
Oh! what a splendid city! But what god shall be its patron?
for whom shall we weave the peplus?[1]

f[1] A sacred cloth, with which the statue of Athene in the Acropolis
was draped.

PISTHETAERUS
Why not choose Athene Polias?[1]

f[1] Meaning, to be patron-goddess of the city.  Athene had a temple
of this name.

EUELPIDES
Oh! what a well-ordered town 'twould be to have a female deity
armed from head to foot, while Clisthenes[1] was spinning!

f[1] An Athenian effeminate, frequently ridiculed by Aristophanes.

PISTHETAERUS
Who then shall guard the Pelargicon?[1]

f[1] This was the name of the wall surrounding the Acropolis.

EPOPS
One of us, a bird of Persian strain, who is everywhere proclaimed to be
the bravest of all, a true chick of Ares.[1]

f[1] i.e. the fighting cock.

EUELPIDES
Oh! noble chick! What a well-chosen god for a rocky home!

PISTHETAERUS
Come! into the air with you to help the workers who are building
the wall; carry up rubble, strip yourself to mix the mortar, take up
the hod, tumble down the ladder, an you like, post sentinels, keep
the fire smouldering beneath the ashes, go round the walls, bell
in hand,[1] and go to sleep up there yourself; then d[i]spatch two
heralds, one to the gods above, the other to mankind on earth
and come back here.

f[1] To waken the sentinels, who might else have fallen asleep.
--There are several merry contradictions in the various parts
of this list of injunctions.

EUELPIDES
As for yourself, remain here, and may the plague take you for
a troublesome fellow!

PISTHETAERUS
Go, friend, go where I send you, for without you my orders
cannot be obeyed.  For myself, I want to sacrifice to the new god,
and I am going to summon the priest who must preside at the ceremony.
Slaves! slaves! bring forward the basket and the lustral water.

CHORUS
I do as you do, and I wish as you wish, and I implore you to
address powerful and solemn prayers to the gods, and in addition to
immolate a sheep as a token of our gratitude.  Let us sing the
Pythian chant in honour of the god, and let Chaeris accompany our
voices.

PISTHETAERUS (TO THE FLUTE-PLAYER)
Enough! but, by Heracles! what is this?  Great gods! I have seen
many prodigious things, but I never saw a muzzled raven.[1]

f[1] In allusion to the leather strap which flute-players wore
to constrict the cheeks and add to the power of the breath.
The performer here no doubt wore a raven's mask.

EPOPS
Priest! 'tis high time! Sacrifice to the new gods.

PRIEST
I begin, but where is he with the basket?  Pray to the Vesta
of the birds, to the kite, who presides over the hearth, and
to all the god and goddess-birds who dwell in Olympus.

CHORUS
Oh! Hawk, the sacred guardian of Sunium, oh, god of the storks!

PRIEST
Pray to the swan of Delos, to Latona the mother of the quails, and to
Artemis, the goldfinch.

PISTHETAERUS
'Tis no longer Artemis Colaenis, but Artemis the goldfinch.[1]

f[1] Hellanicus, the Mitylenian historian, tells that this surname
of Artemis is derived from Colaenus, King of Athens before Cecrops
and a descendant of Hermes.  In obedience to an oracle he erected
a temple to the goddess, invoking her as Artemis Colaenis (the Artemis
of Colaenus).

PRIEST
And to Bacchus, the finch and Cybele, the ostrich and mother
of the gods and mankind.

CHORUS
Oh! sovereign ostrich, Cybele, The mother of Cleocritus,[1]
grant health and safety to the Nephelococcygians as well as
to the dwellers in Chios...

f[1] This Cleocritus, says the scholiast, was long-necked and strutted
like an ostrich.

PISTHETAERUS
The dwellers in Chios!  Ah! I am delighted they should be thus
mentioned on all occasions.[1]

f[1] The Chians were the most faithful allies of Athens, and hence
their name was always mentioned in prayers, decrees, etc.

CHORUS
...to the heroes, the birds, to the sons of heroes, to
the porphyrion, the pelican, the spoon-bill, the redbreast, the grouse,
the peacock, the horned-owl, the teal, the bittern, the heron,
the stormy petrel, the fig-pecker, the titmouse...

PISTHETAERUS
Stop! stop! you drive me crazy with your endless list.  Why,
wretch, to what sacred feast are you inviting the vultures and
the sea-eagles?  Don't you see that a single kite could easily carry off
the lot at once?  Begone, you and your fillets and all; I shall know
how to complete the sacrifice by myself.

PRIEST
It is imperative that I sing another sacred chant for the rite
of the lustral water, and that I invoke the immortals, or at least one
of them, provided always that you have some suitable food to offer
him; from what I see here, in the shape of gifts, there is naught
whatever but horn and hair.

PISTHETAERUS
Let us address our sacrifices and our prayers to the winged gods.

A POET
Oh, Muse! celebrate happy Nephelococcygia in your hymns.

PISTHETAERUS
What have we here?  Where did you come from, tell me?  Who are you?

POET
I am he whose language is sweeter than honey, the zealous slave
of the Muses, as Homer has it.

PISTHETAERUS
You a slave! and yet you wear your hair long?

POET
No, but the fact is all we poets are the assiduous slaves
of the Muses, according to Homer.

PISTHETAERUS
In truth your little cloak is quite holy too through zeal!
But, poet, what ill wind drove you here?

POET
I have composed verses in honour of your Nephelococcygia, a host
of splendid dithyrambs and parthenians[1] worthy of Simonides himself.

f[1] Verses sung by maidens.

PISTHETAERUS
And when did you compose them?  How long since?

POET
Oh! 'tis long, aye, very long, that I have sung in honour of this city.

PISTHETAERUS
But I am only celebrating its foundation with this sacrifice;[1]
I have only just named it, as is done with little babies.

f[1] This ceremony took place on the tenth day after birth, and
may be styled the pagan baptism.

POET
"Just as the chargers fly with the speed of the wind, so does
the voice of the Muses take its flight.  Oh! thou noble founder of
the town of Aetna,[1] thou, whose name recalls the holy sacrifices,[2]
make us such gift as thy generous heart shall suggest."

f[1] Hiero, tyrant of Syracuse. --This passage is borrowed from Pindar.
f[2] [Hiero] in Greek means 'sacrifice.'

PISTHETAERUS
He will drive us silly if we do not get rid of him by some present.
Here! you, who have a fur as well as your tunic, take it off
and give it to this clever poet.  Come, take this fur; you look to me
to be shivering with cold.

POET
My Muse will gladly accept this gift; but engrave these verses
of Pindar's on your mind.

PISTHETAERUS
Oh! what a pest! 'Tis impossible then to be rid of him!

POET
"Straton wanders among the Scythian nomads, but has no linen garment.
He is sad at only wearing an animal's pelt and no tunic."
Do you conceive my bent?

PISTHETAERUS
I understand that you want me to offer you a tunic.  Hi! you (TO
EUELPIDES), take off yours; we must help the poet....  Come, you,
take it and begone.

POET
I am going, and these are the verses that I address to this city:
"Phoebus of the golden throne, celebrate this shivery,
freezing city; I have travelled through fruitful and snow-covered
plains.  Tralala! Tralala!"[1]

f[1] A parody of poetic pathos, not to say bathos.

PISTHETAERUS
What are you chanting us about frosts?  Thanks to the tunic, you no
longer fear them.  Ah! by Zeus! I could not have believed this cursed
fellow could so soon have learnt the way to our city.   Come, priest,
take the lustral water and circle the altar.

PRIEST
Let all keep silence!

A PROPHET
Let not the goat be sacrificed.[1]

F[1] Which the priest was preparing to sacrifice.

PISTHETAERUS
Who are you?

PROPHET
Who am I?  A prophet.

PISTHETAERUS
Get you gone.

PROPHET
Wretched man, insult not sacred things.  For there is an oracle
of Bacis, which exactly applies to Nephelococcygia.

PISTHETAERUS
Why did you not reveal it to me before I founded my city?

PROPHET
The divine spirit was against it.

PISTHETAERUS
Well, 'tis best to know the terms of the oracle.

PROPHET
"But when the wolves and the white crows shall dwell together
between Corinth and Sicyon..."

PISTHETAERUS
But how do the Corinthians concern me?

PROPHET
'Tis the regions of the air that Bacis indicated in this manner.
"They must first sacrifice a white-fleeced goat to Pandora, and give
the prophet, who first reveals my words, a good cloak and new sandals."

PISTHETAERUS
Are the sandals there?

PROPHET
Read.  "And besides this a goblet of wine and a good share
of the entrails of the victim."

PISTHETAERUS
Of the entrails--is it so written?

PROPHET
Read.  "If you do as I command, divine youth, you shall be an eagle
among the clouds; if not, you shall be neither turtle-dove, nor eagle,
nor woodpecker."

PISTHETAERUS
Is all that there?

PROPHET
Read.

PISTHETAERUS
This oracle in no sort of way resembles the one Apollo dictated
to me: "If an impostor comes without invitation to annoy you during
the sacrifice and to demand a share of the victim, apply a stout stick
to his ribs."

PROPHET
You are drivelling.

PISTHETAERUS
"And don't spare him, were he an eagle from out of the clouds,
were it Lampon[1] himself or the great Diopithes."[2]

f[1] Noted Athenian diviner, who, when the power was still shared
between Thucydides and Pericles, predicted that it would soon be
centred in the hands of the latter; his ground for this prophecy was
the sight of a ram with a single horn.
f[2] No doubt another Athenian diviner, and possibly the same person whom
Aristophanes names in 'The Knights' and 'The Wasps' as being a thief.

PROPHET
Is all that there?

PISTHETAERUS
Here, read it yourself, and go and hang yourself.

PROPHET
Oh! unfortunate wretch that I am.

PISTHETAERUS
Away with you, and take your prophecies elsewhere.

METON[1]
I have come to you.

f[1] A celebrated geometrician and astronomer.

PISTHETAERUS
Yet another pest!  What have you come to do?  What's your plan?
What's the purpose of your journey?  Why these splendid buskins?

METON
I want to survey the plains of the air for you and to parcel
them into lots.

PISTHETAERUS
In the name of the gods, who are you?

METON
Who am I?  Meton, known throughout Greece and at Colonus.[1]

f[1] A deme contiguous to Athens. It is as though he said, "Well known
throughout all England and at Croydon.

PISTHETAERUS
What are these things?

METON
Tools for measuring the air.  In truth, the spaces in the air
have precisely the form of a furnace.  With this bent ruler I draw
a line from top to bottom; from one of its points I describe a circle
with the compass.  Do you understand?

PISTHETAERUS
Not the very least.

METON
With the straight ruler I set to work to inscribe a square
within this circle; in its centre will be the market-place, into which
all the straight streets will lead, converging to this centre like
a star, which, although only orbicular, sends forth its rays
in a straight line from all sides.

PISTHETAERUS
Meton, you new Thales...[1]

f[1] Thales was no less famous as a geometrician than he was as a sage.

METON
What d'you want with me?

PISTHETAERUS
I want to give you a proof of my friendship.  Use your legs.

METON
Why, what have I to fear?

PISTHETAERUS
'Tis the same here as in Sparta.  Strangers are driven away,
and blows rain down as thick as hail.

METON
Is there sedition in your city?

PISTHETAERUS
No, certainly not.

METON
What's wrong then?

PISTHETAERUS
We are agreed to sweep all quacks and impostors far from our borders.

METON
Then I'm off.

PISTHETAERUS
I fear 'tis too late.  The thunder growls already. (BEATS HIM.)

METON
Oh, woe! oh, woe!

PISTHETAERUS
I warned you.  Now, be off, and do your surveying somewhere else.
(METON TAKES TO HIS HEELS.)

AN INSPECTOR
Where are the Proxeni?[1]

f[1] Officers of Athens, whose duty was to protect strangers who came
on political or other business, and see to their interests generally.

PISTHETAERUS
Who is this Sardanapalus?[1]

f[1] He addresses the inspector thus because of the royal
and magnificent manners he assumes.

INSPECTOR
I have been appointed by lot to come to Nephelococcygia.
as inspector.[1]

f[1] Magistrates appointed to inspect the tributary towns.

PISTHETAERUS
An inspector! and who sends you here, you rascal?

INSPECTOR
A decree of T[e]leas.[1]

f[1] A much-despised citizen, already mentioned.  He ironically
supposes him invested with the powers of an Archon, which ordinarily
were entrusted only to men of good repute.

PISTHETAERUS
Will you just pocket your salary, do nothing, and be off?

INSPECTOR
I' faith! that I will; I am urgently needed to be at Athens to attend
the assembly; for I am charged with the interests of Pharnaces.[1]

f[1] A Persian satrap. --An allusion to certain orators, who, bribed
with Asiatic gold, had often defended the interests of the foe
in the Public Assembly.

PISTHETAERUS
Take it then, and be off.  See, here is your salary.  (BEATS HIM.)

INSPECTOR
What does this mean?

PISTHETAERUS
'Tis the assembly where you have to defend Pharnaces.

INSPECTOR
You shall testify that they dare to strike me, the inspector.

PISTHETAERUS
Are you not going to clear out with your urns?  'Tis not to be
believed; they send us inspectors before we have so much as paid
sacrifice to the gods.

A DEALER IN DECREES
"If the Nephelococcygian does wrong to the Athenian..."

PISTHETAERUS
Now whatever are these cursed parchments?

DEALER IN DECREES
I am a dealer in decrees, and I have come here to sell you
the new laws.

PISTHETAERUS
Which?

DEALER IN DECREES
"The Nephelococcygians shall adopt the same weights, measures
and decrees as the Olophyxians."[1]

f[1] A Macedonian people in the peninsula of Chalcidice.  This name
is chosen because of its similarity to the Greek word [for] 'to groan.'
It is from another verb, meaning the same thing, that Pisthetaerus coins
the name of Ototyxians, i.e. groaners, because he is about to beat
the dealer. --The mother-country had the right to impose any law
it chose upon its colonies.

PISTHETAERUS
And you shall soon be imitating the Ototyxians.  (BEATS HIM.)

DEALER IN DECREES
Hullo! what are you doing?

PISTHETAERUS
Now will you be off with your decrees?  For I am going to let YOU
see some severe ones.

INSPECTOR (RETURNING)
I summon Pisthetaerus for outrage for the month of Munychion.[1]

f[1] Corresponding to our month of April.

PISTHETAERUS
Ha! my friend! are you still there?

DEALER IN DECREES
"Should anyone drive away the magistrates and not receive them,
according to the decree duly posted..."

PISTHETAERUS
What! rascal! you are there too?

INSPECTOR
Woe to you! I'll have you condemned to a fine of ten thousand
drachmae.

PISTHETAERUS
And I'll smash your urns.[1]

f[1] Which the inspector had brought with him for the purpose
of inaugurating the assemblies of the people or some tribunal.

INSPECTOR
Do you recall that evening when you stooled against the column where
the decrees are posted?

PISTHETAERUS
Here! here! let him be seized.  (THE INSPECTOR RUNS OFF.)  Well!
don't you want to stop any longer?

PRIEST
Let us get indoors as quick as possible; we will sacrifice the goat
inside.[1]

f[1] So that the sacrifices might no longer be interrupted.

CHORUS
Henceforth it is to me that mortals must address their
sacrifices and their prayers.  Nothing escapes my sight nor my might.
My glance embraces the universe, I preserve the fruit in the flower
by destroying the thousand kinds of voracious insects the soil
produces, which attack the trees and feed on the germ when it has
scarcely formed in the calyx; I destroy those who ravage the balmy
terrace gardens like a deadly plague; all these gnawing crawling
creatures perish beneath the lash of my wing.  I hear it proclaimed 
everywhere: "A talent for him who shall kill Diagoras of Melos,[1]
and a talent for him who destroys one of the dead tyrants."[2]
We likewise wish to make our proclamation: "A talent to him among you
who shall kill Philocrates, the Struthian;[3] four, if he
brings him to us alive.  For this Philocrates skewers the finches
together and sells them at the rate of an obolus for seven.  He
tortures the thrushes by blowing them out, so that they may look
bigger, sticks their own feathers into the nostrils of blackbirds, and
collects pigeons, which he shuts up and forces them, fastened in a
net, to decoy others." That is what we wish to proclaim.  And if anyone
is keeping birds shut up in his yard, let him hasten to let them
loose; those who disobey shall be seized by the birds and we shall put
them in chains, so that in their turn they may decoy other men.

Happy indeed is the race of winged birds who need no cloak in winter!
Neither do I fear the relentless rays of the fiery dog-days;
when the divine grasshopper, intoxicated with the sunlight, when noon
is burning the ground, is breaking out into shrill melody; my home
is beneath the foliage in the flowery meadows.  I winter in deep
caverns, where I frolic with the mountain nymphs, while in spring
I despoil the gardens of the Graces and gather the white, virgin berry
on the myrtle bushes.

I want now to speak to the judges about the prize they are going
to award; if they are favourable to us, we will load them with
benefits far greater than those Paris[4] received.  Firstly, the owls
of Laurium,[5] which every judge desires above all things, shall never
be wanting to you; you shall see them homing with you, building their
nests in your money-bags and laying coins.  Besides, you shall be
housed like the gods, for we shall erect gables[6] over your dwellings;
if you hold some public post and want to do a little pilfering,
we will give you the sharp claws of a hawk.  Are you dining in town,
we will provide you with crops.[7]  But, if your award is against us,
don't fail to have metal covers fashioned for yourselves, like those
they place over statues;[8] else, look out! for the day you wear
a white tunic all the birds will soil it with their droppings.

f[1] A disciple of Democrites; he passed over from superstition
to  atheism.  The injustice and perversity of mankind led him to deny
the existence of the gods, to lay bare the mysteries and to break
the idols.  The Athenians had put a price on his head, so he left Greece
and perished soon afterwards in a storm at sea.
f[2] By this jest Aristophanes means to imply that tyranny is dead, and
that no one aspires to despotic power, though this silly accusation
was constantly being raised by the demagogues and always favourably
received by the populace.
f[3] A poulterer. --Strouthian, used in joke to designate him, as if
from  the name of his 'deme,' is derived from [the Greek for] 'a sparrow.'
The  birds' foe is thus grotesquely furnished with an ornithological
surname.
f[4] From Aphrodite (Venus), to whom he had awarded the apple, prize
of  beauty, in the contest of the "goddesses three."
f[5] Laurium was an Athenian deme at the extremity of the Attic
peninsula containing valuable silver mines, the revenues of which
were largely employed in the maintenance of the fleet and payment
of the crews. The "owls of Laurium," of course, mean pieces of money;
the Athenian coinage was stamped with a representation of an owl,
the bird of Athene.
f[6] A pun, impossible to keep in English, on the two meanings
of [the Greek] word which signifies both an eagle and the gable
of a house or pediment of a temple.
f[7] That is, birds' crops, into which they could stow away plenty
of good things.
f[8] The Ancients appear to have placed metal discs over statues
standing in the open air, to save them from injury from the weather, etc.

PISTHETAERUS
Birds! the sacrifice is propitious.  But I see no messenger
coming from the wall to tell us what is happening.  Ah! here comes
one running himself out of breath as though he were running the Olympic
stadium.

MESSENGER
Where, where is he?  Where, where, where is he?  Where, where, where
is he?  Where is Pisthetaerus, our leader?

PISTHETAERUS
Here am I.

MESSENGER
The wall is finished.

PISTHETAERUS
That's good news.

MESSENGER
'Tis a most beautiful, a most magnificent work of art.  The wall is
so broad that Proxenides, the Braggartian, and Theogenes could pass
each other in their chariots, even if they were drawn by steeds as big
as the Trojan horse.

PISTHETAERUS
'Tis wonderful!

MESSENGER
Its length is one hundred stadia; I measured it myself.

PISTHETAERUS
A decent length, by Posidon!  And who built such a wall?

MESSENGER
Birds--birds only; they had neither Egyptian brickmaker, nor
stone-mason, nor carpenter; the birds did it all themselves; I could
hardly believe my eyes.  Thirty thousand cranes came from Libya
with a supply of stones,[1] intended for the foundations.  The water-
rails chiselled them with their beaks.  Ten thousand storks were busy
making bricks; plovers and other water fowl carried water
into the air.

f[1] So as not to be carried away by the wind when crossing the sea,
cranes are popularly supposed to ballast themselves with stones,
which they carry in their beaks.

PISTHETAERUS
And who carried the mortar?

MESSENGER
Herons, in hods.

PISTHETAERUS
But how could they put the mortar into hods?

MESSENGER
Oh! 'twas a truly clever invention; the geese used their feet
like spades; they buried them in the pile of mortar and then emptied
them into the hods.

PISTHETAERUS
Ah! to what use cannot feet be put?[1]

f[1] Pisthetaerus modifies the Greek proverbial saying, "To what use
cannot hands be put?"

MESSENGER
You should have seen how eagerly the ducks carried bricks.  To
complete the tale, the swallows came flying to the work, their beaks
full of mortar and their trowel on their back, just the way little
children are carried.

PISTHETAERUS
Who would want paid servants after this?  But tell me, who did
the woodwork?

MESSENGER
Birds again, and clever carpenters too, the pelicans, for they
squared up the gates with their beaks in such a fashion that one would
have thought they were using axes; the noise was just like a dockyard.
Now the whole wall is tight everywhere, securely bolted and well
guarded; it is patrolled, bell in hand; the sentinels stand everywhere
and beacons burn on the towers.  But I must run off to clean myself;
the rest is your business.

CHORUS
Well! what do you say to it?  Are you not astonished at the wall
being completed so quickly?

PISTHETAERUS
By the gods, yes, and with good reason.  'Tis really not to be
believed.  But here comes another messenger from the wall to bring us
some further news!  What a fighting look he has!

SECOND MESSENGER
Oh! oh! oh! oh! oh! oh!

PISTHETAERUS
What's the matter?

SECOND MESSENGER
A horrible outrage has occurred; a god sent by Zeus has passed
through our gates and has penetrated the realms of the air without
the knowledge of the jays, who are on guard in the daytime.

PISTHETAERUS
'Tis an unworthy and criminal deed.  What god was it?

SECOND MESSENGER
We don't know that.  All we know is, that he has got wings.

PISTHETAERUS
Why were not guards sent against him at once?

SECOND MESSENGER
We have d[i]spatched thirty thousand hawks of the legion of Mounted
Archers.[1]  All the hook-clawed birds are moving against him, the
kestrel, the buzzard, the vulture, the great-horned owl; they cleave
the air, so that it resounds with the flapping of their wings; they are
looking everywhere for the god, who cannot be far away; indeed, if I
mistake not, he is coming from yonder side.

f[1] A corps of Athenian cavalry was so named.

PISTHETAERUS
All arm themselves with slings and bows!  This way, all our soldiers;
shoot and strike!  Some one give me a sling!

CHORUS
War, a terrible war is breaking out between us and the gods!  Come,
let each one guard Air, the son of Erebus,[1] in which the clouds
float.  Take care no immortal enters it without your knowledge.
Scan all sides with your glance.  Hark! methinks I can hear the
rustle of the swift wings of a god from heaven.

f[1] Chaos, Night, Tartarus, and Erebus alone existed in the beginning;
Eros was born from Night and Erebus, and he wedded Chaos and begot
Earth, Air, and Heaven; so runs the fable.

PISTHETAERUS
Hi! you woman! where are you flying to?  Halt, don't stir! keep
motionless! not a beat of your wing! --Who are you and from what
country?  You must say whence you come.[1]

f[1] Iris appears from the top of the stage and arrests her flight
in mid-career.

IRIS
I come from the abode of the Olympian gods.

PISTHETAERUS
What's your name, ship or cap?[1]

f[1] Ship, because of her wings, which resemble oars; cap, because she
no doubt wore the head-dress (as a messenger of the gods) with which
Hermes is generally depicted.

IRIS
I am swift Iris.

PISTHETAERUS
Paralus or Salaminia?[1]

f[1] The names of the two sacred galleys which carried Athenian
officials on State business.

IRIS
What do you mean?

PISTHETAERUS
Let a buzzard rush at her and seize her.[1]

f[1] A buzzard is named in order to raise a laugh, the Greek name also
meaning, etymologically, provided with three testicles, vigorous
in love.

IRIS
Seize me!  But what do all these insults mean?

PISTHETAERUS
Woe to you!

IRIS
'Tis incomprehensible.

PISTHETAERUS
By which gate did you pass through the wall, wretched woman?

IRIS
By which gate?  Why, great gods, I don't know.

PISTHETAERUS
You hear how she holds us in derision.  Did you present yourself
to the officers in command of the jays?  You don't answer.  Have you
a permit, bearing the seal of the storks?

IRIS
Am I awake?

PISTHETAERUS
Did you get one?

IRIS
Are you mad?

PISTHETAERUS
No head-bird gave you a safe-conduct?

IRIS
A safe-conduct to me, you poor fool!

PISTHETAERUS
Ah! and so you slipped into this city on the sly and into these
realms of air-land that don't belong to you.

IRIS
And what other roads can the gods travel?

PISTHETAERUS
By Zeus! I know nothing about that, not I.  But they won't pass
this way.  And you still dare to complain!  Why, if you were treated
according to your deserts, no Iris would ever have more justly
suffered death.

IRIS
I am immortal.

PISTHETAERUS
You would have died nevertheless. --Oh! 'twould be truly
intolerable! What! should the universe obey us and the gods alone
continue their insolence and not understand that they must submit
to the law of the strongest in their due turn?  But tell me, where
are you flying to?

IRIS
I?  The messenger of Zeus to mankind, I am going to tell them to
sacrifice sheep and oxen on the altars and to fill their streets
with the rich smoke of burning fat.

PISTHETAERUS
Of which gods are you speaking?

IRIS
Of which?  Why, of ourselves, the gods of heaven.

PISTHETAERUS
You, gods?

IRIS
Are there others then?

PISTHETAERUS
Men now adore the birds as gods, and 'tis to them, by Zeus, that
they must offer sacrifices, and not to Zeus at all!

IRIS
Oh! fool! fool! Rouse not the wrath of the gods, for 'tis
terrible indeed.  Armed with the brand of Zeus, Justice would
annihilate your race; the lightning would strike you as it did
Licymnius and consume both your body and the porticos of your palace.[1]

f[1] Iris' reply is a parody of the tragic style. --'Lycimnius'
is, according to the scholiast, the title of a tragedy by Euripides,
which is about a ship that is struck by lightning.

PISTHETAERUS
Here! that's enough tall talk.  Just you listen and keep quiet!
Do you take me for a Lydian or a Phrygian[1] and think to frighten me
with your big words?  Know, that if Zeus worries me again, I shall go
at the head of my eagles, who are armed with lightning, and reduce his
dwelling and that of Amphion to cinders.[2]  I shall send more than six
hundred porphyrions clothed in leopards' skins[3] up to heaven against
him; and formerly a single Porphyrion gave him enough to do.  As for
you, his messenger, if you annoy me, I shall begin by stretching your
legs asunder, and so conduct myself, Iris though you be, that despite
my age, you will be astonished.  I will show you something that will
make you three times over.

f[1] i.e. for a poltroon, like the slaves, most of whom came to Athens
from these countries.
f[2] A parody of a passage in the lost tragedy of 'Niobe' of Aeschylus.
f[3] Because this bird has a spotted plumage. --Porphyrion is also
the name of one of the Titans who tried to storm heave.

IRIS
May you perish, you wretch, you and your infamous words!

PISTHETAERUS
Won't you be off quickly?  Come, stretch your wings or look out for squalls!

IRIS
If my father does not punish you for your insults...

PISTHETAERUS
Ha!...  but just you be off elsewhere to roast younger folk than us
with your lightning.

CHORUS
We forbid the gods, the sons of Zeus, to pass through our city and
the mortals to send them the smoke of their sacrifices by this road.

PISTHETAERUS
'Tis odd that the messenger we sent to the mortals has never
returned.

HERALD
Oh! blessed Pisthetaerus, very wise, very illustrious, very
gracious, thrice happy, very...  Come, prompt me, somebody, do.

PISTHETAERUS
Get to your story!

HERALD
All peoples are filled with admiration for your wisdom, and they
award you this golden crown.

PISTHETAERUS
I accept it.  But tell me, why do the people admire me?

HERALD
Oh you, who have founded so illustrious a city in the air, you
know not in what esteem men hold you and how many there are who burn
with desire to dwell in it.  Before your city was built, all men had
a mania for Sparta; long hair and fasting were held in honour, men
went dirty like Socrates and carried staves.  Now all is changed.
Firstly, as soon as 'tis dawn, they all spring out of bed together
to go and seek their food, the same as you do; then they fly off
towards the notices and finally devour the decrees.  The bird-madness
is so clear, that many actually bear the names of birds.  There is
a halting victualler, who styles himself the partridge; Menippus calls
himself the swallow; Opuntius the one-eyed crow; Philocles the lark;
Theogenes the fox-goose; Lycurgus the ibis; Chaerephon the bat;
Syracosius the magpie; Midias the quail;[1] indeed he looks like
a quail that has been hit hard over the head.  Out of love for the birds
they repeat all the songs which concern the swallow, the teal, the
goose or the pigeon; in each verse you see wings, or at all events
a few feathers.  This is what is happening down there.  Finally,
there are more than ten thousand folk who are coming here from earth
to ask you for feathers and hooked claws; so, mind you supply yourself
with wings for the immigrants.

f[1] All these surnames bore some relation to the character or the build
of the individual to whom the poet applies them. --Chaerephon, 
Socrates' disciple,
was of white and ashen hue. --Opuntius was one-eyed. --Syracosius was 
a braggart.
--Midias had a passion for quail-fights, and, besides, resembled that bird
physically.

PISTHETAERUS
Ah! by Zeus, 'tis not the time for idling.  Go as quick as possible
and fill every hamper, every basket you can find with wings.  Manes[1]
will bring them to me outside the walls, where I will welcome those
who present themselves.

f[1] Pisthetaerus' servant, already mentioned.

CHORUS
This town will soon be inhabited by a crowd of men.

PISTHETAERUS
If fortune favours us.

CHORUS
Folk are more and more delighted with it.

PISTHETAERUS
Come, hurry up and bring them along.

CHORUS
Will not man find here everything that can please him--wisdom,
love, the divine Graces, the sweet face of gentle peace?

PISTHETAERUS
Oh! you lazy servant! won't you hurry yourself?

CHORUS
Let a basket of wings be brought speedily.  Come, beat him as I do,
and put some life into him; he is as lazy as an ass.

PISTHETAERUS
Aye, Manes is a great craven.

CHORUS
Begin by putting this heap of wings in order; divide them in three
parts according to the birds from whom they came; the singing, the
prophetic[1] and the aquatic birds; then you must take care
to distribute them to the men according to their character.

f[1] From the inspection of which auguries were taken, e.g. the eagles,
the vultures, the crows.

PISTHETAERUS (TO MANES)
Oh! by the kestrels! I can keep my hands off you no longer; you
are too slow and lazy altogether.

A PARRICIDE[1]
Oh! might I but become an eagle, who soars in the skies!  Oh! might
I fly above the azure waves of the barren sea![2]

f[1] Or rather, a young man who contemplated parricide.
f[2] A parody of verses in Sophocles 'Oenomaus.'

PISTHETAERUS
Ha! 'twould seem the news was true; I hear someone coming who
talks of wings.

PARRICIDE
Nothing is more charming than to fly; I burn with desire to live
under the same laws as the birds; I am bird-mad and fly
towards you, for I want to live with you and to obey your laws.

PISTHETAERUS
Which laws?  The birds have many laws.

PARRICIDE
All of them; but the one that pleases me most is, that among the
birds it is considered a fine thing to peck and strangle one's father.

PISTHETAERUS
Aye, by Zeus! according to us, he who dares to strike his father, while
still a chick, is a brave fellow.

PARRICIDE
And therefore I want to dwell here, for I want to strangle my
father and inherit his wealth.

PISTHETAERUS
But we have also an ancient law written in the code of the storks,
which runs thus, "When the stork father has reared his young and has
taught them to fly, the young must in their turn support the father."

PARRICIDE
'Tis hardly worth while coming all this distance to be compelled
to keep my father!

PISTHETAERUS
No, no, young friend, since you have come to us with such
willingness, I am going to give you these black wings, as though you
were an orphan bird; furthermore, some good advice, that I received
myself in infancy.  Don't strike your father, but take these wings
in one hand and these spurs in the other; imagine you have a
cock's crest on your head and go and mount guard and fight; live
on your pay and respect your father's life.  You're a gallant fellow!
Very well, then! Fly to Thrace and fight.[1]

f[1] The Athenians were then besieging Amphipolis in the Thracian Chalcidice.

PARRICIDE
By Bacchus! 'Tis well spoken; I will follow your counsel.

PISTHETAERUS
'Tis acting wisely, by Zeus.

CINESIAS[1]
"On my light pinions I soar off to Olympus; in its capricious
flight my Muse flutters along the thousand paths of poetry in turn..."

f[1] There was a real Cinesias--a dythyrambic poet born at Thebes.

PISTHETAERUS
This is a fellow will need a whole shipload of wings.

CINESIAS (singing)
"...and being fearless and vigorous, it is seeking fresh outlet."

PISTHETAERUS
Welcome, Cinesias, you lime-wood man![1] Why have you come here
a-twisting your game leg in circles?

f[1] The scholiast thinks that Cinesias, who was tall and slight
of build, wore a kind of corset of lime-wood to support his waist--
surely rather a far-fetched interpretation!

CINESIAS
"I want to become a bird, a tuneful nightingale."

PISTHETAERUS
Enough of that sort of ditty.  Tell me what you want.

CINESIAS
Give me wings and I will fly into the topmost airs to gather fresh
songs in the clouds, in the midst of the vapours and the fleecy snow.

PISTHETAERUS
Gather songs in the clouds?

CINESIAS
'Tis on them the whole of our latter-day art depends.  The most
brilliant dithyrambs are those that flap their wings in void space
and are clothed in mist and dense obscurity.  To appreciate this,
just listen.

PISTHETAERUS
Oh! no, no, no!

CINESIAS
By Hermes! but indeed you shall.  "I shall travel through thine
ethereal empire like a winged bird, who cleaveth space with his
long neck..."

PISTHETAERUS
Stop! easy all, I say![1]

f[1] The Greek word used here was the word of command employed
to stop the rowers.

CINESIAS
"...as I soar over the seas, carried by the breath of the
winds..."

PISTHETAERUS
By Zeus! but I'll cut your breath short.

CINESIAS
"...now rushing along the tracks of Notus, now nearing Boreas
across the infinite wastes of the ether." (PISTHETAERUS BEATS HIM.}
Ah! old man, that's a pretty and clever idea truly!

PISTHETAERUS
What! are you not delighted to be cleaving the air?[1]

F[1] Cinesias makes a bound each time that Pisthetaerus strikes him.

CINESIAS
To treat a dithyrambic poet, for whom the tribes dispute with each
other, in this style![1]

f[1] The tribes of Athens, or rather the rich citizens belonging
to them, were wont on feast-days to give representations of dithyrambic
choruses as well as of tragedies and comedies.

PISTHETAERUS
Will you stay with us and form a chorus of winged birds as slender
as Leotrophides[1] for the Cecropid tribe?

f[1] Another dithyrambic poet, a man of extreme leanness.

CINESIAS
You are making game of me, 'tis clear; but know that I shall
never leave you in peace if I do not have wings wherewith
to traverse the air.

AN INFORMER
What are these birds with downy feathers, who look so pitiable
to me?  Tell me, oh swallow with the long dappled wings.[1]

f[1] A parody of a hemistich from 'Alcaeus.' --The informer is
dissatisfied at only seeing birds of sombre plumage and poor appearance.
He would have preferred to denounce the rich.

PISTHETAERUS
Oh! but 'tis a regular invasion that threatens us.  Here comes
another of them, humming along.

INFORMER
Swallow with the long dappled wings, once more I summon you.

PISTHETAERUS
It's his cloak I believe he's addressing; 'faith, it stands in great
need of the swallows' return.[1]

f[1] The informer, says the scholiast, was clothed with a ragged cloak,
the tatters of which hung down like wings, in fact, a cloak that could
not protect him from the cold and must have made him long for the
swallows' return, i.e. the spring.

INFORMER
Where is he who gives out wings to all comers?

PISTHETAERUS
'Tis I, but you must tell me for what purpose you want them.

INFORMER
Ask no questions.  I want wings, and wings I must have.

PISTHETAERUS
Do you want to fly straight to Pellene?[1]

f[1] A town in Achaia, where woollen cloaks were made.

INFORMER
I?  Why, I am an accuser of the islands,[1] an informer...

f[1] His trade was to accuse the rich citizens of the subject islands,
and drag them before the Athenian court; he explains later the special
advantages of this branch of the informer's business.

PISTHETAERUS
A fine trade, truly!

INFORMER
...a hatcher of lawsuits.  Hence I have great need of wings
to prowl round the cities and drag them before justice.

PISTHETAERUS
Would you do this better if you had wings?

INFORMER
No, but I should no longer fear the pirates; I should return
with the cranes, loaded with a supply of lawsuits by way of ballast.

PISTHETAERUS
So it seems, despite all your youthful vigour, you make it your
trade to denounce strangers?

INFORMER
Well, and why not?  I don't know how to dig.

PISTHETAERUS
But, by Zeus! there are honest ways of gaining a living at your age
without all this infamous trickery.

INFORMER
My friend, I am asking you for wings, not for words.

PISTHETAERUS
'Tis just my words that give you wings.

INFORMER
And how can you give a man wings with your words?

PISTHETAERUS
'Tis thus that all first start.

INFORMER
All?

PISTHETAERUS
Have you not often heard the father say to young men in the
barbers' shops, "It's astonishing how Diitrephes' advice has made
my son fly to horse-riding." --"Mine," says another, "has flown
towards tragic poetry on the wings of his imagination."

INFORMER
So that words give wings?

PISTHETAERUS
Undoubtedly; words give wings to the mind and make a man soar
to heaven.  Thus I hope that my wise words will give you wings to fly
to some less degrading trade.

INFORMER
But I do not want to.

PISTHETAERUS
What do you reckon on doing then?

INFORMER
I won't belie my breeding; from generation to generation we have
lived by informing.  Quick, therefore, give me quickly some light,
swift hawk or kestrel wings, so that I may summon the islanders,
sustain the accusation here, and haste back there again on flying
pinions.

PISTHETAERUS
I see.  In this way the stranger will be condemned even before
he appears.

INFORMER
That's just it.

PISTHETAERUS
And while he is on his way here by sea, you will be flying
to the islands to despoil him of his property.

INFORMER
You've hit it, precisely; I must whirl hither and thither like
a perfect humming-top.

PISTHETAERUS
I catch the idea.  Wait, i' faith, I've got some fine Corcyraean
wings.[1]  How do you like them?

f[1] That is, whips--Corcyra being famous for these articles.

INFORMER
Oh! woe is me! Why, 'tis a whip!

PISTHETAERUS
No, no; these are the wings, I tell you, that set the top a-spinning.

INFORMER
Oh! oh! oh!

PISTHETAERUS
Take your flight, clear off, you miserable cur, or you will soon
see what comes of quibbling and lying. Come, let us gather up our wings
and withdraw.

CHORUS
In my ethereal flights I have seen many things new and strange and
wondrous beyond belief.  There is a tree called Cleonymus belonging
to an unknown species; it has no heart, is good for nothing and is
as tall as it is cowardly.  In springtime it shoots forth calumnies
instead of buds and in autumn it strews the ground with bucklers in
place of leaves.[1]

Far away in the regions of darkness, where no ray of light ever
enters, there is a country, where men sit at the table of the heroes
and dwell with them always--save always in the evening.  Should any
mortal meet the hero Orestes at night, he would soon be stripped and
covered with blows from head to foot.[2]

f[1] Cleonymous is a standing butt of Aristophanes' wit, both as an informer
and a notorious poltroon.
f[2] In allusion to the cave of the bandit Orestes; the poet terms him a hero
only because of his heroic name Orestes.

PROMETHEUS
Ah! by the gods! if only Zeus does not espy me! Where is Pisthetaerus?

PISTHETAERUS
Ha! what is this?  A masked man!

PROMETHEUS
Can you see any god behind me?

PISTHETAERUS
No, none.  But who are you, pray?

PROMETHEUS
What's the time, please?

PISTHETAERUS
The time?  Why, it's past noon.  Who are you?

PROMETHEUS
Is it the fall of day?  Is it no later than that?[1]

f[1] Prometheus wants night to come and so reduce the risk
of being seen from Olympus.

PISTHETAERUS
Oh! 'pon my word! but you grow tiresome.

PROMETHEUS
What is Zeus doing?  Is he dispersing the clouds or gathering them?[1]

f[1] The clouds would prevent Zeus seeing what was happening below him.

PISTHETAERUS
Take care, lest I lose all patience.

PROMETHEUS
Come, I will raise my mask.

PISTHETAERUS
Ah! my dear Prometheus!

PROMETHEUS
Stop! stop! speak lower!

PISTHETAERUS
Why, what's the matter, Prometheus?

PROMETHEUS
H'sh! h'sh! Don't call me by my name; you will be my ruin, if Zeus
should see me here.  But, if you want me to tell you how things are
going in heaven, take this umbrella and shield me, so that the gods
don't see me.

PISTHETAERUS
I can recognize Prometheus in this cunning trick.  Come, quick
then, and fear nothing; speak on.

PROMETHEUS
Then listen.

PISTHETAERUS
I am listening, proceed!

PROMETHEUS
It's all over with Zeus.

PISTHETAERUS
Ah! and since when, pray?

PROMETHEUS
Since you founded this city in the air.  There is not a man who now
sacrifices to the gods; the smoke of the victims no longer reaches us.
Not the smallest offering comes!  We fast as though it were the
festival of Demeter.[1]  The barbarian gods, who are dying of hunger,
are bawling like Illyrians[2] and threaten to make an armed descent
upon Zeus, if he does not open markets where joints of the victims
are sold.

f[1] The third day of the festival of Demeter was a fast.
f[2] A semi-savage people, addicted to violence and brigandage.

PISTHETAERUS
What! there are other gods besides you, barbarian gods who dwell
above Olympus?

PROMETHEUS
If there were no barbarian gods, who would be the patron of
Execestides?[1]

f[1] Who, being reputed a stranger despite his pretension to the title
of a citizen, could only have a strange god for his patron or
tutelary deity.

PISTHETAERUS
And what is the name of these gods?

PROMETHEUS
Their name?  Why, the Triballi.[1]

f[1] The Triballi were a Thracian people; it was a term commonly used
in  Athens to describe coarse men, obscene debauchees and greedy
parasites.

PISTHETAERUS
Ah, indeed! 'tis from that no doubt that we derive the word
'tribulation.'[1]

f[1] There is a similar pun in the Greek.

PROMETHEUS
Most likely.  But one thing I can tell you for certain, namely,
that Zeus and the celestial Triballi are going to send deputies here
to sue for peace.  Now don't you treat, unless Zeus restores the sceptre
to the birds and gives you Basileia[1] in marriage.

f[1] i.e. the 'supremacy' of Greece, the real object of the war.

PISTHETAERUS
Who is this Basileia?

PROMETHEUS
A very fine young damsel, who makes the lightning for Zeus; all
things come from her, wisdom, good laws, virtue, the fleet, calumnies,
the public paymaster and the triobolus.

PISTHETAERUS
Ah! then she is a sort of general manageress to the god.

PROMETHEUS
Yes, precisely.  If he gives you her for your wife, yours will be
the almighty power.  That is what I have come to tell you; for you know
my constant and habitual goodwill towards men.

PISTHETAERUS
Oh, yes! 'tis thanks to you that we roast our meat.[1]

f[1] Prometheus had stolen the fire from the gods to gratify mankind.

PROMETHEUS
I hate the gods, as you know.

PISTHETAERUS
Aye, by Zeus, you have always detested them.

PROMETHEUS
Towards them I am a veritable Timon;[1] but I must return in all
haste, so give me the umbrella; if Zeus should see me from up there,
he would think I was escorting one of the Canephori.[2]

f[1] A celebrated misanthrope, contemporary to Aristophanes. Hating
the  society of men, he had only a single friend, Apimantus, to whom
he was attached, because of their similarity of character; he also
liked Alcibiades, because he foresaw that this young man would be
the ruin of his country.
f[2] The Canephori were young maidens, chosen from the first families
of the city, who carried baskets wreathed with myrtle at the feast
of Athene, while at those of Bacchus and Demeter they appeared
with gilded baskets. --The daughters of 'Metics,' or resident aliens,
walked behind them, carrying an umbrella and a stool.

PISTHETAERUS
Wait, take this stool as well.

CHORUS
Near by the land of the Sciapodes[1] there is a marsh, from the
borders whereof the odious Socrates evokes the souls of men.
Pisander[2] came one day to see his soul, which he had left there when
still alive.  He offered a little victim, a camel,[3] slit his throat
and, following the example of Ulysses, stepped one pace backwards.[4]
Then that bat of a Chaerephon[5] came up from hell to drink the camel's
blood.

f[1] According to Ctesias, the Sciapodes were a people who dwelt
on the borders of the Atlantic. Their feet were larger than the rest
of their bodies, and to shield themselves from the sun's rays they
held up one of their feet as an umbrella. --By giving the Socratic
philosophers the name of Sciapodes here Aristophanes wishes to convey
that they are walking in the dark and busying themselves with
the greatest nonsense.
f[2] This Pisander was a notorious coward; for this reason the poet
jestingly supposes that he had lost his soul, the seat of courage.
f[3] Considering the shape and height of the camel, [it] can certainly
not be included in the list of SMALL victims, e.g. the sheep and
the goat.
f[4] In the evocation of the dead, Book XI of the Odyssey.
f[5] Chaerephon was given this same title by the Herald earlier
in this  comedy. --Aristophanes supposes him to have come from hell
because he is lean and pallid.

POSIDON[1]
This is the city of Nephelococcygia, Cloud-cuckoo-town, whither we come
as ambassadors.  (TO TRIBALLUS)  Hi! what are you up to? you are
throwing your cloak over the left shoulder.  Come, fling it quick over
the right!  And why, pray, does it draggle in this fashion?  Have you
ulcers to hide like Laespodias?[2]  Oh! democracy![3] whither, oh!
whither are you leading us?  Is it possible that the gods have chosen
such an envoy?

f[1] Posidon appears on the stage accompanied by Heracles and
a  Triballian god.
f[2] An Athenian general. --Neptune is trying to give Triballus some
notions of elegance and good behaviour.
f[3] Aristophanes supposes that democracy is in the ascendant in Olympus
as it is in Athens.

TRIBALLUS
Leave me alone.

POSIDON
Ugh! the cursed savage! you are by far the most barbarous of all
the gods. --Tell me, Heracles, what are we going to do?

HERACLES
I have already told you that I want to strangle the fellow who has
dared to block us in.

POSIDON
But, my friend, we are envoys of peace.

HERACLES
All the more reason why I wish to strangle him.

PISTHETAERUS
Hand me the cheese-grater; bring me the silphium for sauce; pass
me the cheese and watch the coals.[1]

f[1] He is addressing his servant, Manes.

HERACLES
Mortal! we who greet you are three gods.

PISTHETAERUS
Wait a bit till I have prepared my silphium pickle.

HERACLES
What are these meats?[1]

f[1] Heracles softens at sight of the food. --Heracles is the glutton
of the comic poets.

PISTHETAERUS
These are birds that have been punished with death for attacking
the people's friends.

HERACLES
And you are seasoning them before answering us?

PISTHETAERUS
Ah! Heracles! welcome, welcome! What's the matter?[1]

f[1] He pretends not to have seen them at first, being so much engaged
with his cookery.

HERACLES
The gods have sent us here as ambassadors to treat for peace.

A SERVANT
There's no more oil in the flask.

PISTHETAERUS
And yet the birds must be thoroughly basted with it.[1]

f[1] He pretends to forget the presence of the ambassadors.

HERACLES
We have no interest to serve in fighting you; as for you, be
friends and we promise that you shall always have rain-water in your
pools and the warmest of warm weather.  So far as these points go we
are armed with plenary authority.

PISTHETAERUS
We have never been the aggressors, and even now we are as well
disposed for peace as yourselves, provided you agree to one
equitable condition, namely, that Zeus yield his sceptre to the birds.
If only this is agreed to, I invite the ambassadors to dinner.

HERACLES
That's good enough for me.  I vote for peace.

POSIDON
You wretch! you are nothing but a fool and a glutton.  Do you
want to dethrone your own father?

PISTHETAERUS
What an error!  Why, the gods will be much more powerful if the
birds govern the earth.  At present the mortals are hidden beneath
the clouds, escape your observation, and commit perjury in your
name; but if you had the birds for your allies, and a man, after
having sworn by the crow and Zeus, should fail to keep his oath,
the crow would dive down upon him unawares and pluck out his eye.

POSIDON
Well thought of, by Posidon![1]

f[1] Posidon jestingly swears by himself.

HERACLES
My notion too.

PISTHETAERUS (TO THE TRIBALLIAN)
And you, what's your opinion?

TRIBALLUS
Nabaisatreu.[1]

f[1] The barbarian god utters some gibberish which Pisthetaerus 
interprets into consent.

PISTHETAERUS
D'you see? he also approves.  But hear another thing in which we can
serve you.  If a man vows to offer a sacrifice to some god, and then
procrastinates, pretending that the gods can wait, and thus does not
keep his word, we shall punish his stinginess.

POSIDON
Ah! ah! and how?

PISTHETAERUS
While he is counting his money or is in the bath, a kite will
relieve him, before he knows it, either in coin or in clothes, of
the value of a couple of sheep, and carry it to the god.

HERACLES
I vote for restoring them the sceptre.

POSIDON
Ask the Triballian.

HERACLES
Hi Triballian, do you want a thrashing?

TRIBALLUS
Saunaka baktarikrousa.

HERACLES
He says, "Right willingly."

POSIDON
If that be the opinion of both of you, why, I consent too.

HERACLES
Very well! we accord the sceptre.

PISTHETAERUS
Ah! I was nearly forgetting another condition.  I will leave Here
to Zeus, but only if the young Basileia is given me in marriage.

POSIDON
Then you don't want peace.  Let us withdraw.

PISTHETAERUS
It matters mighty little to me.  Cook, look to the gravy.

HERACLES
What an odd fellow this Posidon is!  Where are you off to?  Are we
going to war about a woman?

POSIDON
What else is there to do?

HERACLES
What else?  Why, conclude peace.

POSIDON
Oh! you ninny! do you always want to be fooled?  Why, you are seeking
your own downfall.  If Zeus were to die, after having yielded
them the sovereignty, you would be ruined, for you are the heir of all
the wealth he will leave behind.

PISTHETAERUS
Oh! by the gods! how he is cajoling you.  Step aside, that I may
have a word with you.  Your uncle is getting the better of you, my poor
friend.[1]  The law will not allow you an obolus of the paternal
property, for you are a bastard and not a legitimate child.

f[1] Heracles, the god of strength, was far from being remarkable
in the way of cleverness.

HERACLES
I a bastard! What's that you tell me?

PISTHETAERUS
Why, certainly; are you not born of a stranger woman?  Besides,
is not Athene recognized as Zeus' sole heiress?  And no daughter
would be that, if she had a legitimate brother.

HERACLES
But what if my father wished to give me his property on his
death-bed, even though I be a bastard?

PISTHETAERUS
The law forbids it, and this same Posidon would be the first to
lay claim to his wealth, in virtue of being his legitimate brother.
Listen; thus runs Solon's law: "A bastard shall not inherit, if
there are legitimate children; and if there are no legitimate
children, the property shall pass to the nearest kin."[1]

f[1] This was Athenian law.

HERACLES
And I get nothing whatever of the paternal property?

PISTHETAERUS
Absolutely nothing.  But tell me, has your father had you entered
on the registers of his phratria?[1]

f[1] The poet attributes to the gods the same customs as those
which governed Athens, and according to which no child was
looked upon as legitimate unless his father had entered him
on the registers of his  phratria.  The phratria was a division
of the tribe and consisted of thirty families.

HERACLES
No, and I have long been surprised at the omission.

PISTHETAERUS
What ails you, that you should shake your fist at heaven?  Do you want
to fight it?  Why, be on my side, I will make you a king and will feed
you on bird's milk and honey.

HERACLES
Your further condition seems fair to me.  I cede you the young
damsel.

POSIDON
But I, I vote against this opinion.

PISTHETAERUS
Then it all depends on the Triballian.  (TO THE TRIBALLIAN.) What do
you say?

TRIBALLUS
Big bird give daughter pretty and queen.

HERACLES
You say that you give her?

POSIDON
Why no, he does not say anything of the sort, that he gives her; else
I cannot understand any better than the swallows.

PISTHETAERUS
Exactly so.  Does he not say she must be given to the swallows?

POSIDON
Very well! you two arrange the matter; make peace, since you
wish it so; I'll hold my tongue.

HERACLES
We are of a mind to grant you all that you ask.  But come up
there with us to receive Basileia and the celestial bounty.

PISTHETAERUS
Here are birds already cut up, and very suitable for a nuptial feast.

HERACLES
You go and, if you like, I will stay here to roast them.

PISTHETAERUS
You to roast them! you are too much the glutton; come along with us.

HERACLES
Ah! how well I would have treated myself!

PISTHETAERUS
Let some[one] bring me a beautiful and magnificent tunic for the
wedding.

CHORUS[1]
At Phanae,[2] near the Clepsydra,[3] there dwells a people who have
neither faith nor law, the Englottogastors,[4] who reap, sow, pluck
the vines and the figs[5] with their tongues; they belong to a barbaric
race, and among them the Philippi and the Gorgiases[6] are to be found;
'tis these Englottogastorian Philippi who introduced the custom all over
Attica of cutting out the tongue separately at sacrifices.[7]

f[1] The chorus continues to tell what it has seen on its flights.
f[2] The harbour of the island of Chios; but this name is here used
in the sense of being the land of informers ([from the Greek for]
'to denounce').
f[3] i.e. near the orators' platform, in the Public Assembly, or because
there stood the water-clock, by which speeches were limited.
f[4] A coined name, made up of [the Greek for] the tongue, and [for]
the stomach, and meaning those who fill their stomach with what they
gain with their tongues, to wit, the orators.
f[5] [The Greek for] a fig forms part of the word which in Greek means
an informer.
f[6] Both rhetoricians.
f[7] Because they consecrated it specially to the god of eloquence.

A MESSENGER
Oh, you, whose unbounded happiness I cannot express in words,
thrice happy race of airy birds, receive your king in your fortunate
dwellings.  More brilliant than the brightest star that illumes the
earth, he is approaching his glittering golden palace; the sun
itself does not shine with more dazzling glory.  He is entering with
his bride at his side,[1] whose beauty no human tongue can express; in
his hand he brandishes the lightning, the winged shaft of Zeus;
perfumes of unspeakable sweetness pervade the ethereal realms.  'Tis
a glorious spectacle to see the clouds of incense wafting in light
whirlwinds before the breath of the Zephyr!  But here he is himself.
Divine Muse! let thy sacred lips begin with songs of happy omen.

f[1] Basileia, whom he brings back from heaven.

CHORUS
Fall back! to the right! to the left! advance![1] Fly around this
happy mortal, whom Fortune loads with her blessings.  Oh! oh! what
grace! what beauty!  Oh, marriage so auspicious for our city!  All
honour to this man! 'tis through him that the birds are called to such
glorious destinies.  Let your nuptial hymns, your nuptial songs,
greet him and his Basileia!  'Twas in the midst of such festivities
that the Fates formerly united Olympian Here to the King who governs
the gods from the summit of his inaccessible throne.  Oh! Hymen! oh!
Hymenaeus! Rosy Eros with the golden wings held the reins and guided
the chariot; 'twas he, who presided over the union of Zeus and the
fortunate Here.  Oh! Hymen! oh! Hymenaeus!

f[1] Terms used in regulating a dance.

PISTHETAERUS
I am delighted with your songs, I applaud your verses.  Now
celebrate the thunder that shakes the earth, the flaming lightning
of Zeus and the terrible flashing thunderbolt.

CHORUS
Oh, thou golden flash of the lightning! oh, ye divine shafts
of flame, that Zeus has hitherto shot forth!  Oh, ye rolling thunders,
that bring down the rain!  'Tis by the order of OUR king that ye
shall now stagger the earth!  Oh, Hymen! 'tis through thee that he
commands the universe and that he makes Basileia, whom he has robbed
from Zeus, take her seat at his side.  Oh! Hymen! oh! Hymenaeus!

PISTHETAERUS
Let all the winged tribes of our fellow-citizens follow the bridal
couple to the palace of Zeus[1] and to the nuptial couch!  Stretch forth
your hands, my dear wife!  Take hold of me by my wings and let us
dance; I am going to lift you up and carry you through the air.

f[1] Where Pisthetaerus is henceforth to reign.

CHORUS
Oh, joy! Io Paean! Tralala! victory is thing, oh, thou greatest of the gods!










This etext was produced from the 1912 James Nisbet & Co. edition by
David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





BOOKS AND BOOKMEN

by Ian Maclaren  [Pseudonym of the Rev. John Watson]




They cannot be separated any more than sheep and a shepherd, but I am
minded to speak of the bookman rather than of his books, and so it
will be best at the outset to define the tribe.

It does not follow that one is a bookman because he has many books,
for he may be a book huckster or his books may be those without which
a gentleman's library is not complete.  And in the present imperfect
arrangement of life one may be a bookman and yet have very few books,
since he has not the wherewithal to purchase them.  It is the
foolishness of his kind to desire a loved author in some becoming
dress, and his fastidiousness to ignore a friend in a fourpence-
halfpenny edition.  The bookman, like the poet, and a good many other
people, is born and not made, and my grateful memory retains an
illustration of the difference between a bookowner and a bookman
which I think is apropos.  As he was to preside at a lecture I was
delivering he had in his courtesy invited me to dinner, which was
excellent, and as he proposed to take the role that night of a man
who had been successful in business, but yet allowed himself in
leisure moments to trifle with literature, he desired to create an
atmosphere, and so he proposed with a certain imposing air that we
should visit what he called "my library."  Across the magnificence of
the hall we went in stately procession, he first, with that kind of
walk by which a surveyor of taxes could have at once assessed his
income, and I, the humblest of the bookman tribe, following in the
rear, trembling like a skiff in the wake of an ocean liner.  "There,"
he said, with his thumbs in the armholes of his waistcoat, "what do
you think of that?" And THAT was without question a very large and
ornate and costly mahogany bookcase with glass doors.  Before I saw
the doors I had no doubt about my host, but they were a seal upon my
faith, for although a bookman is obliged to have one bit of glass in
his garden for certain rare plants from Russia and Morocco, to say
nothing of the gold and white vellum lily upon which the air must not
be allowed to blow, especially when charged with gas and rich in
dust, yet he hates this conservatory, just as much as he loves its
contents.  His contentment is to have the flowers laid out in open
beds, where he can pluck a blossom at will.  As often as one sees the
books behind doors, and most of all when the doors are locked, then
he knows that the owner is not their lover, who keeps tryst with them
in the evening hours when the work of the day is done, but their
jailer, who has bought them in the market-place for gold, and holds
them in this foreign place by force.  It has seemed to me as if
certain old friends looked out from their prison with appealing
glance, and one has been tempted to break the glass and let, for
instance, Elia go free.  It would be like the emancipation of a
slave.  Elia was not, good luck for him, within this particular
prison, and I was brought back from every temptation to break the
laws of property by my chairman, who was still pursuing his
catechism.  "What," was question two, "do you think I paid for THAT?"
It was a hopeless catechism, for I had never possessed anything like
THAT, and none of my friends had in their homes anything like THAT,
and in my wildest moments I had never asked the price of such a thing
as THAT.  As it loomed up before me in its speckless respectability
and insolence of solid wealth my English sense of reverence for money
awoke, and I confessed that this matter was too high for me; but even
then, casting a glance of deprecation in its direction, I noticed
THAT was almost filled by a single work, and I wondered what it could
be.  "Cost 80 pounds if it cost a penny, and I bought it second-hand
in perfect condition for 17 pounds, 5s., with the books thrown in--
All the Year Round from the beginning in half calf;" and then we
returned in procession to the drawing-room, where my patron
apologised for our absence, and explained that when two bookmen got
together over books it was difficult to tear them away.  He was an
admirable chairman, for he occupied no time with a review of
literature in his address, and he slept without being noticed through
mine (which is all I ask of a chairman), and so it may seem
ungrateful, but in spite of "THAT" and any books, even Spenser and
Chaucer, which THAT might have contained, this Maecenas of an evening
was not a bookman.

It is said, and now I am going to turn the application of a pleasant
anecdote upside down, that a Colonial squatter having made his pile
and bethinking himself of his soul, wrote home to an old friend to
send him out some chests of books, as many as he thought fit, and the
best that he could find.  His friend was so touched by this sign of
grace that he spent a month of love over the commission, and was
vastly pleased when he sent off, in the best editions and in pleasant
binding, the very essence of English literature.  It was a
disappointment that the only acknowledgment of his trouble came on a
postcard, to say that the consignment had arrived in good condition.
A year afterwards, so runs the story, he received a letter which was
brief and to the point.  "Have been working over the books, and if
anything new has been written by William Shakespeare or John Milton,
please send it out."  I believe this is mentioned as an instance of
barbarism.  It cannot be denied that it showed a certain ignorance of
the history of literature, which might be excused in a bushman, but
it is also proved, which is much more important, that he had the
smack of letters in him, for being turned loose without the guide of
any training in this wide field, he fixed as by instinct on the two
classics of the English tongue.  With the help of all our education,
and all our reviews, could you and I have done better, and are we not
every day, in our approval of unworthy books, doing very much worse?
Quiet men coming home from business and reading, for the sixth time,
some noble English classic, would smile in their modesty if any one
should call them bookmen, but in so doing they have a sounder
judgment in literature than coteries of clever people who go crazy
for a brief time over the tweetling of a minor poet, or the
preciosity of some fantastic critic.

There are those who buy their right to citizenship in the
commonwealth of bookmen, but this bushman was free-born, and the sign
of the free-born is, that without critics to aid him, or the training
of a University, he knows the difference between books which are so
much printed stuff and a good book which is "the Precious life-blood
of a Master Spirit."  The bookman will of course upon occasion trifle
with various kinds of reading, and there is one member of the
brotherhood who has a devouring thirst for detective stories, and has
always been very grateful to the creator of Sherlock Holmes.  It is
the merest pedantry for a man to defend himself with a shamed face
for his light reading:  it is enough that he should be able to
distinguish between the books which come and go and those which
remain.  So far as I remember, The Mystery of a Hansom Cab and John
Inglesant came out somewhat about the same time, and there were those
of us who read them both; but while we thought the Hansom Cab a very
ingenious plot which helped us to forget the tedium of a railway
journey, I do not know that there is a copy on our shelves.
Certainly it is not lying between The Ordeal of Richard Feverel and
The Mayor of Casterbridge.  But some of us venture to think that in
that admirable historical romance which moves with such firm foot
through both the troubled England and the mysterious Italy of the
seventeenth century, Mr. Shorthouse won a certain place in English
literature.

When people are raving between the soup and fish about some popular
novel which to-morrow will be forgotten, but which doubtless, like
the moths which make beautiful the summer-time, has its purpose in
the world of speech, it gives one bookman whom I know the keenest
pleasure to ask his fair companion whether she has read Mark
Rutherford.  He is proudly conscious at the time that he is a witness
to perfection in a gay world which is content with excitement, and he
would be more than human if he had not in him a touch of the literary
Pharisee.  She has NOT read Mark Rutherford, and he does not advise
her to seek it at the circulating library, because it will not be
there, and if she got it she would never read more than ten pages.
Twenty thousand people will greedily read Twice Murdered and Once
Hung and no doubt they have their reward, while only twenty people
read Mark Rutherford; but then the multitude do not return to Twice
Murdered, while the twenty turn again and again to Mark Rutherford
for its strong thinking and its pure sinewy English style.  And the
children of the twenty thousand will not know Twice Murdered, but the
children of the twenty, with others added to them, will know and love
Mark Rutherford.  Mr. Augustine Birrell makes it, I think, a point of
friendship that a man should love George Borrow, whom I think to
appreciate is an excellent but an acquired taste; there are others
who would propose Mark Rutherford and the Revelation in Tanner's Lane
as a sound test for a bookman's palate.  But . . . de gustibus . . .
!

It is the chief office of the critic, while encouraging all honest
work which either can instruct or amuse, to distinguish between the
books which must be content to pass and the books which must remain
because they have an immortality of necessity.

According to the weightiest of French critics of our time the author
of such a book is one "who has enriched the human mind, who has
really added to its treasures, who has got it to take a step further
. . . who has spoken to all in a style of his own, yet a style which
finds itself the style of everybody, in a style that is at once new
and antique, and is the contemporary of all the ages."  Without doubt
Sainte-Beuve has here touched the classical quality in literature as
with a needle, for that book is a classic to be placed beside Homer
and Virgil and Dante and Shakespeare--among the immortals--which has
wisdom which we cannot find elsewhere, and whose form has risen above
the limitation of any single age.  While ordinary books are houses
which serve for a generation or two at most, this kind of book is the
Cathedral which towers above the building at its base and can be seen
from afar, in which many generations shall find their peace and
inspiration.  While other books are like the humble craft which ply
from place to place along the coast, this book is as a stately
merchantman which compasses the great waters and returns with a
golden argosy.

The subject of the book does not enter into the matter, and on
subjects the bookman is very catholic, and has an orthodox horror of
all sects.  He does not require Mr. Froude's delightful apology to
win the Pilgrim's Progress a place on his shelf, because, although
the bookman may be far removed from Puritanism, yet he knows that
Bunyan had the secret of English style, and although he may be as far
from Romanism, yet he must needs have his A'Kempis (especially in
Pickering's edition of 1828), and when he places the two books side
by side in the department of religion, he has a standing regret that
there is no Pilgrim's Progress also in Pickering.

Without a complete Milton he could not be content.  He would like to
have Masson's Life too in 6 vols. (with index), and he is apt to
consider the great Puritan's prose still finer than his poetry, and
will often take down the Areopagitica that he may breathe the air of
high latitudes; but he has a corner in his heart for that evil living
and mendacious bravo, but most perfect artist, Benvenuto Cellini.
While he counts Gibbon's Rome, I mean the Smith and Milman edition in
8 vols., blue cloth, the very model of histories, yet he revels in
those books which are the material for historians, the scattered
stones out of which he builds his house, such as the diaries of John
Evelyn and our gossip Pepys, and that scandalous book, Grammont's
Memoirs, and that most credulous but interesting of Scots annalists,
Robert Wodrow.

According to the bookman, but not, I am sorry to say, in popular
judgment, the most toothsome kind of literature is the Essay, and you
will find close to his hand a dainty volume of Lamb open perhaps at
that charming paper on "Imperfect Sympathies," and though the bookman
be a Scot yet his palate is pleasantly tickled by Lamb's description
of his national character--Lamb and the Scots did not agree through
an incompatibility of humour--and near by he keeps his Hazlitt, whom
he sometimes considers the most virile writer of the century:  nor
would he be quite happy unless he could find in the dark The Autocrat
of the Breakfast Table.  He is much indebted to a London publisher
for a very careful edition of the Spectator, and still more to that
good bookman, Mr. Austin Dobson, for his admirable introduction.  As
the bookman's father was also a bookman, for the blessing descendeth
unto the third and fourth generation, he was early taught to love De
Quincey, and although, being a truthful man, he cannot swear he has
read every page in all the fifteen volumes--roxburghe calf--yet he
knows his way about in that whimsical, discursive, but ever
satisfying writer, who will write on anything, or any person, always
with freshness and in good English, from the character of Judas
Iscariot and "Murder as a Fine Art" to the Lake Poets--there never
was a Lake school--and the Essenes.  He has much to say on Homer, and
a good deal also on "Flogging in Schools"; he can hardly let go
Immanuel Kant, but if he does it is to give his views, which are not
favourable, of Wilhelm Meister; he is not above considering the art
of cooking potatoes or the question of whether human beings once had
tails, and in his theological moods he will expound St. John's
Epistles, or the principles of Christianity.  The bookman, in fact,
is a quite illogical and irresponsible being, who dare not claim that
he searches for accurate information in his books as for fine gold,
and he has been known to say that that department of books of various
kinds which come under the head of "what's what," and "why's why,"
and "where's where," are not literature.  He does not care, and that
may be foolish, whether he agrees with the writer, and there are
times when he does not inquire too curiously whether the writer be
respectable, which is very wrong, but he is pleased if this man who
died a year ago or three hundred years has seen something with his
own eyes and can tell him what he saw in words that still have in
them the breath of life, and he will go with cheerful inconsequence
from Chaucer, the jolliest of all book companions, and Rabelais--
although that brilliant satirist had pages which the bookman avoids,
because they make his gorge rise--to Don Quixote.  If he carries a
Horace, Pickering's little gem, in his waistcoat pocket, and
sometimes pictures that genial Roman club-man in the Savile, he has
none the less an appetite for Marcus Aurelius.  The bookman has a
series of love affairs before he is captured and settles down, say,
with his favourite novel, and even after he is a middle-aged married
man he must confess to one or two book friendships which are perilous
to his inflammable heart.

In the days of calf love every boy has first tasted the sweetness of
literature in two of the best novels ever written, as well as two of
the best pieces of good English.  One is Robinson Crusoe and the
other the Pilgrim's Progress.  Both were written by masters of our
tongue, and they remain until this day the purest and most appetising
introduction to the book passion.  They created two worlds of
adventure with minute vivid details and constant surprises--the foot
on the sand, for instance, in Crusoe, and the valley of the shadow
with the hobgoblin in Pilgrim's Progress--and one will have a
tenderness for these two first loves even until the end.  Afterwards
one went afield and sometimes got into queer company, not bad but
simply a little common.  There was an endless series of Red Indian
stories in my school-days, wherein trappers could track the enemy by
a broken blade of grass, and the enemy escaped by coming down the
river under a log, and the price was sixpence each.  We used to pass
the tuck-shop at school for three days on end in order that we might
possess Leaping Deer, the Shawnee Spy.  We toadied shamefully to the
owner of Bull's Eye Joe, who, we understood, had been the sole
protection of a frontier state.  Again and again have I tried to find
one of those early friends, and in many places have I inquired, but
my humble companions have disappeared and left no signs, like country
children one played with in holiday times.

It appears, however, that I have not been the only lover of the
trapper stories, nor the only one who has missed his friends, for I
received a letter not long ago from a bookman telling me that he had
seen my complaint somewhere, and sending me the Frontier Angel on
loan strictly that I might have an hour's sinless enjoyment.  He also
said he was on the track of Bill Bidden, another famous trapper, and
hoped to send me word that Bill was found, whose original value was
sixpence, but for whom this bookman was now prepared to pay gold.
One, of course, does not mean that the Indian and trapper stories had
the same claim to be literature as the Pilgrim's Progress, for, be it
said with reverence, there was not much distinction in the style, or
art in the narrative, but they were romances, and their subjects
suited boys, who are barbarians, and there are moments when we are
barbarians again, and above all things these tales bring back the
days of long ago.  It was later that one fell under the power of two
more mature and exacting charmers, Mayne Reid's Rifle Rangers and
Dumas' Monte Christo.  The Rangers has vanished with many another
possession of the past, but I still retain in a grateful memory the
scene where Rube, the Indian fighter, who is supposed to have
perished in a prairie fire and is being mourned by the hero, emerges
with much humour from the inside of a buffalo which was lying dead
upon the plain, and rails at the idea that he could be wiped out so
easily.  Whether imagination has been at work or not I do not know,
but that is how my memory has it now, and to this day I count that
resurrection a piece of most fetching work.

Rambling through a bookshop a few months ago I lighted on a copy of
Monte Christo and bought it greedily, for there was a railway journey
before me.  It is a critical experiment to meet a love of early days
after the years have come and gone.  This stout and very conventional
woman--the mother of thirteen children--could she have been the
black-eyed, slim girl to whom you and a dozen other lads lost their
hearts?  On the whole, one would rather have cherished the former
portrait and not have seen the original in her last estate.  It was
therefore with a flutter of delight that one found in this case the
old charm as fresh as ever--meaning, of course, the prison escape
with its amazing ingenuity and breathless interest.

When one had lost his bashfulness and could associate with grown-up
books, then he was admitted to the company of Scott, and Thackeray,
and Dickens, who were and are, as far as one can see, to be the
leaders of society.  My fond recollection goes back to an evening in
the early sixties when a father read to his boy the first three
chapters of the Pickwick Papers from the green-coloured parts, and it
is a bitter regret that in some clearance of books that precious
Pickwick was allowed to go, as is supposed, with a lot of pamphlets
on Church and State, to the great gain of an unscrupulous dealer.

The editions of Scott are now innumerable, each more tempting than
the other; but affection turns back to the old red and white, in
forty-eight volumes, wherein one first fell under the magician's
spell.  Thackeray, for some reason I cannot recall, unless it were a
prejudice in our home, I did not read in youth, but since then I have
never escaped from the fascination of Vanity Fair and The Newcomes,
and another about which I am to speak.  What giants there were in the
old days, when an average Englishman, tried by some business worry,
would say, "Never mind, Thackeray's new book will be out to-morrow."
They stand, these three sets, Scott, Thackeray, and Dickens, the very
heart of one's library of fiction.  Wearied by sex novels, problem
novels, theological novels, and all the other novels with a purpose,
one returns to the shelf and takes down a volume from this circle,
not because one has not read it, but because one has read it thirty
times and wishes for sheer pleasure's sake to read it again.  Just as
a tired man throws off his dress coat and slips on an old study
jacket, so one lays down the latest thoughtful, or intense, or
something worse pseudo work of fiction, and is at ease with an old
gossip who is ever wise and cheery, who never preaches and yet gives
one a fillip of goodness.  Among the masters one must give a foremost
place to Balzac, who strikes one as the master of the art in French
literature.  It is amazing that in his own day he was not appreciated
at his full value, and that it was really left to time to discover
and vindicate his position.  He is the true founder of the realistic
school in everything wherein that school deserves respect, and has
been loyal to art.  He is also certain to maintain his hold and be an
example to writers after many modern realists have been utterly and
justly forgotten.

Two books from the shelf of fiction are taken down and read once a
year by a certain bookman from beginning to end, and in this matter
he is now in the position of a Mohammedan converted to Christianity,
who is advised by the missionary to choose one of his two wives to
have and to hold as a lawful spouse.  When one has given his heart to
Henry Esmond and the Heart of Midlothian he is in a strait, and
begins to doubt the expediency of literary monogamy.  Of course, if
it go by technique and finish, then Esmond has it, which from first
to last in conception and execution is an altogether lovely book; and
if it go by heroes--Esmond and Butler--then again there is no
comparison, for the grandson of Cromwell's trooper was a very
wearisome, pedantic, grey-coloured Puritan in whom one cannot affect
the slightest interest.  How poorly he compares with Henry Esmond,
who was slow and diffident, but a very brave, chivalrous, single-
hearted, modest gentleman, such as Thackeray loved to describe.  Were
it not heresy to our Lady Castlewood, whom all must love and serve,
it also comes to one that Henry and Beatrix would have made a
complete pair if she had put some assurance in him and he had
installed some principle into her, and Henry Esmond might have
married his young kinswoman had he been more masterful and self-
confident.  Thackeray takes us to a larger and gayer scene than
Scott's Edinburgh of narrow streets and gloomy jails and working
people and old-world theology, but yet it may be after all Scott is
stronger.  No bit of history, for instance, in Esmond takes such a
grip of the imagination as the story of the Porteous mob.  After a
single reading one carries that night scene etched for ever in his
memory.  The sullen, ruthless crowd of dour Scots, the grey rugged
houses lit up by the glare of the torches, the irresistible storming
of the Tolbooth, the abject helplessness of Porteous in the hands of
his enemies, the austere and judicial self-restraint of the people,
who did their work as those who were serving justice, their care to
provide a minister for the criminal's last devotions, and their quiet
dispersal after the execution--all this remains unto to-day the most
powerful description of lynch law in fiction.  The very strength of
old Edinburgh and of the Scots-folk is in the Heart of Midlothian.
The rivalry, however, between these two books must be decided by the
heroine, and it seems dangerous to the lover of Scott to let
Thackeray's fine lady stand side by side with our plain peasant girl,
yet soul for soul which was greater, Rachel of Castlewood or Jeanie
Deans?  Lady Castlewood must be taken at the chief moment in Esmond,
when she says to Esmond:  "To-day, Henry, in the anthem when they
sang, 'When the Lord turned the captivity of Zion we were like them
that dream'--I thought, yes, like them that dream, and then it went,
'They that sow in tears shall reap in joy; and he that goeth forth
and weepeth, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his
sheaves with him.'  I looked up from the book and saw you; I was not
surprised when I saw you, I knew you would come, my dear, and I saw
the gold sunshine round your head."

That she said as she laughed and sobbed, crying out wildly, "Bringing
your sheaves with you, your sheaves with you."  And this again, as
Esmond thinks of her, is surely beaten gold.  "Gracious God, who was
he, weak and friendless creature, that such a love should be poured
out upon him; not in vain, not in vain has he lived that such a
treasure be given him?  What is ambition compared to that but selfish
vanity?  To be rich, to be famous:  what do these profit a year hence
when other names sound louder than yours, when you lie hidden away
under the ground along with the idle titles engraven on your coffin?
Only true love lives after you, follows your memory with secret
blessing or precedes you and intercedes for you.  'Non omnis moriar'-
-if dying I yet live in a tender heart or two, nor am lost and
hopeless living, if a sainted departed soul still loves and prays for
me."  This seems to me the second finest passage in English fiction,
and the finest is when Jeanie Deans went to London and pleaded with
the Queen for the life of her condemned sister, for is there any plea
in all literature so eloquent in pathos and so true to human nature
as this, when the Scottish peasant girl poured forth her heart:
"When the hour of trouble comes to the mind or to the body--and
seldom may it visit your ladyship--and when the hour of death that
comes to high and low--lang and late may it be yours--oh, my lady,
then it is na' what we hae dune for oursels but what we hae dune for
ithers that we think on maist pleasantly.  And the thought that ye
hae intervened to spare the puir thing's life will be sweeter in that
hour, come when it may, than if a word of your mouth could hang the
haill Porteous mob at the tail of ae tow."  Jeanie Deans is the
strongest woman in the gallery of Scott, and an embodiment of all
that is sober, and strong, and conscientious, and passionate in
Scotch nature.

The bookman has indeed no trouble arranging his gossips in his mind,
where they hold good fellowship, but he is careful to keep them apart
upon his bookshelves, and when he comes home after an absence and
finds his study has been tidied, which in the feminine mind means
putting things in order, and to the bookman general anarchy (it was
the real reason Eve was put out of Eden), when he comes home, I say,
and finds that happy but indecorous rascal Boccaccio, holding his
very sides for laughter, between Lecky's History of European Morals
and Law's Serious Call, both admirable books, then the bookman is
much exhilarated.  Because of the mischief that is in him he will not
relieve those two excellent men of that disgraceful Italian's company
for a little space, but if he finds that the domestic sprite has
thrust a Puritan between two Anglican theologians he effects a
separation without delay, for a religious controversy with its din
and clatter is more than he can bear.

The bookman is indeed perpetually engaged in his form of spring
cleaning, which is rearranging his books, and is always hoping to
square the circle, in both collecting the books of one department
together, and also having his books in equal sizes.  After a brief
glance at a folio and an octavo side by side he gives up that
attempt, but although he may have to be content to see his large
Augustine, Benedictine edition, in the same row with Bayle's
Dictionary, he does not like it and comforts himself by thrusting in
between, as a kind of mediator, Spotswood's History of the Church of
Scotland with Burnett's Memoirs of the Dukes of Hamilton, that
edition which has the rare portrait of Charles I. by Faithorne.  He
will be all his life rearranging, and so comes to understand how it
is that women spend forenoons of delight in box rooms or store
closets, and are happiest when everything is turned upside down.  It
is a slow business, rearrangement, for one cannot flit a book bound
after the taste of Grolier, with graceful interlacement and wealth of
small ornaments, without going to the window and lingering for a
moment over the glorious art, and one cannot handle a Compleat Angler
without tasting again some favourite passage.  It is days before five
shelves are reconstructed, days of unmixed delight, a perpetual whirl
of gaiety, as if one had been at a conversazione, where all kinds of
famous people whom you had known afar had been gathered together and
you had spoken to each as if he had been the friend of your boyhood.
It is in fact a time of reminiscences, when the two of you, the other
being Sir Thomas Browne, or Goldsmith, or Scott, or Thackeray, go
over passages together which contain the sweetest recollections of
the past.  When the bookman reads the various suggestions for a
holiday which are encouraged in the daily newspapers for commercial
purposes about the month of July, he is vastly amused by their
futility, and often thinks of pointing out the only holiday which is
perfectly satisfying.  It is to have a week without letters and
without visitors, with no work to do, and no hours, either for rising
up or lying down, and to spend the week in a library, his own, of
course, by preference, opening out by a level window into an old-
fashioned garden where the roses are in full bloom, and to wander as
he pleases from flower to flower where the spirit of the books and
the fragrance of the roses mingle in one delight.

Times there are when he would like to hold a meeting of bookmen, each
of whom should be a mighty hunter, and he would dare to invite Cosmo
Medici, who was as keen about books as he was about commerce, and
according to Gibbon used to import Indian spices and Greek books by
the same vessel, and that admirable Bishop of Durham who was as
joyful on reaching Paris as the Jewish pilgrim was when he went to
Sion, because of the books that were there.  "O Blessed God of Gods,
what a rush of the glow of Pleasure rejoiced our hearts, as often as
we visited Paris, the Paradise of the World!  There we long to
remain, where on account of the greatness of our love the days ever
appear to us to be few.  There are delightful libraries in cells
redolent with aromatics, there flourishing greenhouses of all sorts
of volumes, there academic meads, trembling with the earthquake of
Athenian Peripatetics pacing up and down, there the promontory of
Parnassus and the Porticoes of the Stoics."  The Duke of Roxburghe
and Earl Spencer, two gallant sportsmen whose spoils have enriched
the land; Monkbarns also, though we will not let him bring any
antiquities with him, jagged or otherwise; and Charles Lamb, whom we
shall coax into telling over again how he started out at ten o'clock
on Saturday night and roused up old Barker in Covent Garden, and came
home in triumph with "that folio Beaumont and Fletcher," going forth
almost in tears lest the book should be gone, and coming home
rejoicing, carrying his sheaf with him.  Besides, whether Bodley and
Dibdin like it or not, we must have a Royalty, for there were Queens
who collected, and also on occasions stole books, and though she be
not the greatest of the Queenly bookwomen and did not steal, we shall
invite Mary Queen of Scots, while she is living in Holyrood, and has
her library beside her.  Mary had a fine collection of books well
chosen and beautifully bound, and as I look now at the catalogue it
seems to me a library more learned than is likely to be found even in
the study of an advanced young woman of to-day.  A Book of Devotion
which was said to have belonged to her and afterwards to a Pope,
gloriously bound, I was once allowed to look upon, but did not buy,
because the price was marked in plain figures at a thousand guineas.
It would be something to sit in a corner and hear Monkbarns and
Charles Lamb comparing notes, and to watch for the moment when Lamb
would withdraw all he had said against the Scots people, or Earl
Spencer describing with delight to the Duke of Roxburghe the battle
of Sale.  But I will guarantee that the whole company of bookworms
would end in paying tribute to that intelligent and very fascinating
young woman from Holyrood, who still turns men's heads across the
stretch of centuries.  For even a bookman has got a heart.

Like most diseases the mania for books is hereditary, and if the
father is touched with it the son can hardly escape, and it is not
even necessary that the son should have known his father.  For
Sainte-Beuve's father died when he was an infant and his mother had
no book tastes, but his father left him his books with many comments
on the margins, and the book microbe was conveyed by the pages.  "I
was born," said the great critic in the Consolations, "I was born in
a time of mourning; my cradle rested on a coffin . . . my father left
me his soul, mind, and taste written on every margin of his books."
When a boy grows up beside his father and his father is in the last
stages of the book disease, there is hardly any power which can save
that son, unless the mother be robustly illiterate, in which case the
crossing of the blood may make him impervious.  For a father of this
kind will unconsciously inoculate his boy, allowing him to play
beside him in the bookroom, where the air is charged with germs
(against which there is no disinfectant, I believe, except commercial
conversation), and when the child is weary of his toys will give him
an old book of travels, with quaint pictures which never depart from
the memory.  By and by, so thoughtless is this invalid father, who
has suffered enough, surely, himself from this disease, that he will
allow his boy to open parcels of books, reeking with infection, and
explain to him the rarity of a certain first edition, or show him the
thickness of the paper and the glory of the black-letter in an
ancient book.  Afterwards, when the boy himself has taken ill and
begun on his own account to prowl through the smaller bookstalls, his
father will listen greedily to the stories he has to tell in the
evening, and will chuckle aloud when one day the poor victim of this
deadly illness comes home with a newspaper of the time of Charles
II., which he has bought for threepence.  It is only a question of
time when that lad, being now on an allowance of his own, will be
going about in a suit of disgracefully shabby tweeds, that he may
purchase a Theophrastus of fine print and binding upon which he has
long had his eye, and will be taking milk and bread for his lunch in
the city, because he has a foolish ambition to acquire by a year's
saving the Kelmscott edition of the Golden Legend.  A change of air
might cure him, as for instance twenty years' residence on an
American ranch, but even then on his return the disease might break
out again:  indeed the chances are strong that he is really
incurable.  Last week I saw such a case--the bookman of the second
generation in a certain shop where such unfortunates collect.  For an
hour he had been there browsing along the shelves, his hat tilted
back upon his head that he might hold the books the nearer to his
eyes, and an umbrella under his left arm, projecting awkwardly, which
he had not laid down, because he did not intend to stay more than two
minutes, and knew indeed, as the father of a family, that he ought
not to be there at all.  He often drops in, for this is not one of
those stores where a tradesman hurries forward to ask what you want
and offers you the last novel which has captivated the juicy British
palate; the bookman regards such a place with the same feeling that a
physician has to a patent drug-store.  The dealer in this place so
loved his books that he almost preferred a customer who knew them
above one who bought them, and honestly felt a pang when a choice
book was sold.  Never can I forget what the great Quaritch said to me
when he was showing me the inner shrine of his treasure-house, and I
felt it honest to explain that I could only look, lest he should
think me an impostor.  "I would sooner show such books to a man that
loved them though he couldn't buy them, than a man who gave me my
price and didn't know what he had got."  With this slight anecdote I
would in passing pay the tribute of bookmen to the chief hunter of
big game in our day.

When the bookman is a family man, and I have sometimes doubts whether
he ought not to be a celibate like missionaries of religion and other
persons called to special devotion, he has of course to battle
against his temptation, and his struggles are very pathetic.  The
parallel between dipsomania and bibliomania is very close and
suggestive, and I have often thought that more should be made of it.
It is the wife who in both cases is usually the sufferer and good
angel, and under her happy influence the bookman will sometimes take
the pledge, and for him, it is needless to say, there is only one
cure.  He cannot be a moderate drinker, for there is no possibility
of moderation, and if he is to be saved he must become a total
abstainer.  He must sign the pledge, and the pledge must be made of a
solemn character with witnesses, say his poor afflicted wife and some
intelligent self-made Philistine.  Perhaps it might run like this:
"I, A. B., do hereby promise that I will never buy a classical book
in any tongue, or any book in a rare edition; that I will never spend
money on books in tree-calf or tooled morocco; that I shall never
enter a real old bookshop, but should it be necessary shall purchase
my books at a dry goods store, and there shall never buy anything but
the cheapest religious literature, or occasionally a popular story
for my wife, and to this promise I solemnly set my hand."  With the
ruin of his family before his eyes, or at least, let us say, the
disgraceful condition of the dining-room carpet, he intends to keep
his word, and for a whole fortnight will not allow himself to enter
the street of his favourite bookshop.  Next week, however, business,
so he says at least, takes him down the street, but he remembers the
danger, and makes a brave effort to pass a public-house.  The
mischief of the thing, however, is that there is another public-house
in the street and passing it whets the latent appetite, and when he
is making a brave dash past his own, some poor inebriate, coming out
reluctantly, holds the door open, and the smell is too much for his
new-born virtue.  He will go in just for a moment to pass the time of
day with his friend the publican and see his last brand of books, but
not to buy--I mean to drink--and then he comes across a little
volume, the smallest and slimmest of volumes, a mere trifle of a
thing, and not dear, but a thing which does not often turn up and
which would just round off his collection at a particular point.  It
is only a mere taste, not downright drinking; but ah me, it sets him
on fire again, and I who had seen him go in and then by a providence
have met his wife coming out from buying that carpet, told her where
her husband was, and saw her go to fetch him.  Among the touching
incidents of life, none comes nearer me than to see the bookman's
wife pleading with him to remember his (once) prosperous home and his
(almost) starving children.  And indeed if there be any other as
entirely affecting in this province, it is the triumphant cunning
with which the bookman will smuggle a suspicious brown paper parcel
into his study at an hour when his wife is out, or the effrontery
with which he will declare when caught, that the books have been sent
unbeknown to him, and he supposes merely for his examination.  For,
like drink, this fearsome disease eats into the very fibre of
character, so that its victim will practise tricks to obtain books in
advance of a rival collector, and will tell the most mendacious
stories about what he paid for them.

Should he desire a book, and it be not a king's ransom, there is no
sacrifice he will not make to obtain it.  His modest glass of
Burgundy he will cheerfully surrender, and if he ever travelled by
any higher class, which is not likely, he will now go third, and his
topcoat he will make to last another year, and I do not say he will
not smoke, but a cigar will now leave him unmoved.  Yes, and if he
gets a chance to do an extra piece of writing, between 12 and 2 A.M.,
he will clutch at the opportunity, and all that he saves, he will
calculate shilling by shilling, and the book he purchases with the
complete price--that is the price to which he has brought down the
seller after two days' negotiations--anxious yet joyful days--will be
all the dearer to him for his self-denial.  He has also anodynes for
his conscience when he seems to be wronging his afflicted family, for
is he not gathering the best of legacies for his sons, something
which will make their houses rich for ever, or if things come to the
worst cannot his collection be sold and all he has expended be
restored with usury, which in passing I may say is a vain dream?  But
at any rate, if other men spend money on dinners and on sport, on
carved furniture and gay clothing, may he not also have one luxury in
life?  His conscience, however, does give painful twinges, and he
will leave the Pines Horace, which he has been handling delicately
for three weeks, in hopeless admiration of its marvellous typography,
and be outside the door before a happy thought strikes him, and he
returns to buy it, after thirty minutes' bargaining, with perfect
confidence and a sense of personal generosity.  What gave him this
relief and now suffuses his very soul with charity?  It was a date
which for the moment he had forgotten and which has occurred most
fortunately.  To-morrow will be the birthday of a man whom he has
known all his days and more intimately than any other person, and
although he has not so high an idea of the man as the world is good
enough to hold, and although he has often quarrelled with him and
called him shocking names--which tomcats would be ashamed of--yet he
has at the bottom a sneaking fondness for the fellow, and sometimes
hopes he is not quite so bad after all.  One thing is certain, the
rascal loves a good book and likes to have it when he can, and
perhaps it will make him a better man to show that he has been
remembered and that one person at least believes in him, and so the
bookman orders that delightful treasure to be sent to his own address
in order that next day he may present it--as a birthday present--to
himself.

Concerning tastes in pleasure there can be no final judgment, but for
the bookman it may be said, beyond any other sportsman, he has the
most constant satisfaction, for to him there is no close season,
except the spring cleaning which he furiously resents, and only
allows once in five years, and his autumn holiday, when he takes some
six handy volumes with him.  For him there are no hindrances of
weather, for if the day be sunshine he taketh his pleasure in a
garden, and if the day be sleet of March the fireside is the dearer,
while there is a certain volume--Payne's binding, red morocco, a
favourite colour of his--and the bookman reads Don Quixote with the
more relish because the snowdrift is beating on the window.  During
the hours of the day when he is visiting patients, who tell their
symptoms at intolerable length, or dictating letters about corn, or
composing sermons, which will not always run, the bookman is thinking
of the quiet hour which will lengthen into one hundred and eighty
minutes, when he shall have his reward, the kindliest for which a man
can work or hope to get.  He will spend the time in the good company
of people who will not quarrel with him, nor will he quarrel with
them.  Some of them of high estate and some extremely low; some of
them learned persons and some of them simple, country men.  For while
the bookman counteth it his chief honour and singular privilege to
hold converse with Virgil and Dante, with Shakespeare and Bacon, and
suchlike nobility, yet is he very happy with Bailie Nicol Jarvie and
Dandie Dinmont, with Mr. Micawber and Mrs. Gamp; he is proud when
Diana Vernon comes to his room, and he has a chair for Colonel
Newcome; he likes to hear Coleridge preach, who, as Lamb said, "never
did anything else," and is much flattered when Browning tries to
explain what he meant in Paracelsus.  It repays one for much worry
when William Blake not only reads his Songs of Innocence but also
shows his own illustrations, and he turns to his life of Michael
Angelo with the better understanding after he has read what Michael
Angelo wrote to Vittoria Colonna.  He that hath such friends, grave
or gay, needeth not to care whether he be rich or poor, whether he
know great folk or they pass him by, for he is independent of society
and all its whims, and almost independent of circumstances.  His
friends of this circle will never play him false nor ever take the
pet.  If he does not wish their company they are silent, and then
when he turns to them again there is no difference in the welcome,
for they maintain an equal mind and are ever in good humour.  As he
comes in tired and possibly upset by smaller people they receive him
in a kindly fashion, and in the firelight their familiar faces make
his heart glad.  Once I stood in Emerson's room, and I saw the last
words that he wrote, the pad on which he wrote them, and the pen with
which they were written, and the words are these:  "The Book is a
sure friend, always ready at your first leisure, opens to the very
page you desire, and shuts at your first fatigue."

As the bookman grows old and many of his pleasures cease, he thanks
God for one which grows the richer for the years and never fades.  He
pities those who have not this retreat from the weariness of life,
nor this quiet place in which to sit when the sun is setting.  By the
mellow wisdom of his books and the immortal hope of the greater
writers, he is kept from peevishness and discontent, from bigotry and
despair.  Certain books grow dearer to him with the years, so that
their pages are worn brown and thin, and he hopes with a Birmingham
book-lover, Dr. Showell Rogers, whose dream has been fulfilled, that
Heaven, having a place for each true man, may be "a bookman's
paradise, where early black-lettered tomes, rare and stately, first
folios of Shakespeare, tall copies of the right editions of the
Elzevirs, and vellumed volumes galore, uncropped, uncut, and unfoxed
in all their verdant pureness, fresh as when they left the presses of
the Aldi, are to be had for the asking."  Between this man at least
and his books there will be no separation this side the grave, but
his gratitude to them and his devotion will ever grow and their
ministries to him be ever dearer, especially that Book of books which
has been the surest guide of the human soul.  "While I live," says
one who both wrote and loved books and was numbered among our finest
critics, "while I live and think, nothing can deprive me of my value
for such treasures.  I can help the appreciation of them while I last
and love them till I die, and perhaps if fortune turns her face once
more in kindness upon me before I go, I may chance, some quiet day,
to lay my overbeating temples on a book, and so have the death I most
envy."










This etext was produced from the 1911 Longmans, Green and Co.
"Ballades and Rhymes" edition by David Price, email
ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





Ballads in Blue China and Verses and Translations

by Andrew Lang




Introduction
BALLADES IN BLUE CHINA.
   Ballade of Theocritus
   Ballade of Cleopatra's Needle
   Ballade of Roulette
   Ballade of Sleep
   Ballade of the Midnight Forest
   Ballade of the Tweed
   Ballade of the Book-hunter
   Ballade of the Voyage to Cythera
   Ballade of the Summer Term
   Ballade of the Muse
   Ballade against the Jesuits
   Ballade of Dead Cities
   Ballade of the Royal Game of Golf
   Double Ballade of Primitive Man
   Ballade of Autumn
   Ballade of True Wisdom
   Ballade of Worldly Wealth
   Ballade of Life
   Ballade of Blue China
   Ballade of Dead Ladies
   Villon's Ballade of Good Counsel
   Ballade of the Bookworm
   Valentine in form of Ballade
   Ballade of Old Plays
   Ballade of his Books
   Ballade of the Dream
   Ballade of the Southern Cross
   Ballade of Aucassin
   Ballade Amoureuse
   Ballade of Queen Anne
   Ballade of Blind Love
   Ballade of his Choice of a Sepulchre
   Dizain
VERSES AND TRANSLATIONS.
   A Portrait of 1783
   The Moon's Minion
   In Ithaca
   Homer
   The Burial of Moliere
   Bion
   Spring
   Before the Snow
   Villanelle
   Natural Theology
   The Odyssey
   Ideal
   The Fairy's Gift
   Benedetta Ramus
   Partant pour la Scribie
   St. Andrews Bay
   Woman and the Weed




"Rondeaux, BALLADES,
Chansons dizains, propos menus,
Compte moy qu'ils sont devenuz:
Se faict il plus rien de nouveau?"
CLEMENT MAROT, Dialogue de deux
Amoureux.

"I love a ballad but even too well; if it be doleful matter, merrily
set down, or a very pleasant thing indeed, and sung lamentably."
A Winter's Tale, Act iv. sc. 3.




INTRODUCTION



Thirty years have passed, like a watch in the night, since the
earlier of the two sets of verses here reprinted, Ballades in Blue
China, was published.  At first there were but twenty-two Ballades;
ten more were added later.  They appeared in a little white vellum
wrapper, with a little blue Chinese singer copied from a porcelain
jar; and the frontispiece was a little design by an etcher now
famous.

Thirty years ago blue china was a kind of fetish in some circles,
aesthetic circles, of which the balladist was not a member.

The ballade was an old French form of verse, in France revived by
Theodore de Banville, and restored to an England which had long
forgotten the Middle Ages, by my friends Mr. Austin Dobson and Mr.
Edmund Gosse.  They, so far as I can trust my memory, were the first
to reintroduce these pleasant old French nugae, while an anonymous
author let loose upon the town a whole winged flock of ballades of
amazing dexterity.  This unknown balladist was Mr. Henley; perhaps
he was the first Englishman who ever burst into a double ballade,
and his translations of two of Villon's ballades into modern
thieves' slang were marvels of dexterity.  Mr. Swinburne wrote a
serious ballade, but the form, I venture to think, is not 'wholly
serious,' of its nature, in modern days; and he did not persevere.
Nor did the taste for these trifles long endure.  A good ballade is
almost as rare as a good sonnet, but a middling ballade is almost as
easily written as the majority of sonnets.  Either form readily
becomes mechanical, cheap and facile.  I have heard Mr. George
Meredith improvise a sonnet, a Petrarchian sonnet, obedient to the
rules, without pen and paper.  He spoke 'and the numbers came'; he
sonneted as easily as a living poet, in his Eton days, improvised
Latin elegiacs and Greek hexameters.

The sonnet endures.  Mr. Horace Hutchinson wrote somewhere:  "When
you have read a sonnet, you feel that though there does not seem to
be much of it, you have done a good deal, as when you have eaten a
cold hard-boiled egg."  Still people keep on writing sonnets,
because the sonnet is wholly serious.  In an English sonnet you
cannot easily be flippant of pen.  A few great poets have written
immortal sonnets--among them are Milton, Wordsworth, and Keats.
Thus the sonnet is a thing which every poet thinks it worth while to
try at; like Felix Arvers, he may be made immortal by a single
sonnet.  Even I have written one too many!  Every anthologist wants
to anthologise it (The Odyssey); it never was a favourite of my own,
though it had the honour to be kindly spoken of by Mr. Matthew
Arnold.

On the other hand, no man since Francois Villon has been
immortalised by a single ballade--Mais ou sont les neiges d'antan?

To speak in any detail about these poor ballades would be to indite
a part of an autobiography.  Looking back at the little book, 'what
memories it stirs' in one to whom


'Fate has done this wrong,
That I should write too much and live too long.'


The Ballade of the Tweed, and the Rhymes a la Mode, were dedicated
to the dearest of kinsmen, a cricketer and angler.  The Ballade of
Roulette was inscribed to R. R., a gallant veteran of the Indian
Mutiny, a leader of Light Horse, whose father was a friend of Sir
Walter Scott.  He was himself a Borderer, in whose defeats on the
green field of Roulette I often shared, long, long ago.

So many have gone 'into the world of light' that it is a happiness
to think of him to whom The Ballade of Golf was dedicated, and to
remember that he is still capable of scoring his double century at
cricket, and of lifting the ball high over the trees beyond the
boundaries of a great cricket-field.  Perhaps Mr. Leslie Balfour-
Melville will pardon me for mentioning his name, linked as it is
with so many common memories.  'One is taken and another left.'

A different sort of memory attaches itself to A Ballade of Dead
Cities.  It was written in a Theocritean amoebean way, in
competition with Mr. Edmund Gosse; he need not be ashamed of the
circumstance, for another shepherd, who was umpire, awarded the
prize (two kids just severed from their dams) to his victorious
muse.

The Ballade of the Midnight Forest, the Ballade of the Huntress
Artemis, was translated from Theodore de Banville, whose beautiful
poem came so near the Greek, that when the late Provost of Oriel
translated a part of its English shadow into Greek hexameters, you
might suppose, as you read, that they were part of a lost Homeric
Hymn.

I never wrote a double ballade, and stanzas four and five of the
Double Ballade of Primitive Man were contributed by the learned
doyen of Anthropology, Mr. E. B. Tylor, author of Primitive Culture.

A tout seigneur tout honneur!

In Ballade of his Choice of a Sepulchre, the Windburg is a hill in
Teviotdale.  A Portrait of 1783 was written on a French engraving
after Morland, and Benedetta Ramus was addressed to a mezzotint (an
artist's proof, 'very rare').  It is after Romney and is 'My
Beauty,' as Charles Lamb said (once, unluckily, to a Scot) of an
engraving, after Lionardo, of some fair dead lady.

The sonnet, Natural Theology, is the germ of what the author has
since written, in The Making of Religion, on the long neglected fact
that many of the lowest savages known share the belief in a
benevolent All Father and Judge of men.

Concerning verses in Rhymes a la Mode, visitors to St. Andrews may
be warned not to visit St. Leonard's Chapel, described in the second
stanza of Almae Matres.  In the writer's youth, and even in middle
age,


He loitered idly where the tall
Fresh-budded mountain-ashes blow
Within its desecrated wall.


The once beautiful ruins carpeted with grass and wild flowers have
been doubly desecrated by persons, academic persons, having
authority and a plentiful lack of taste.  The slim mountain-ashes,
fair as the young palm-tree that Odysseus saw beside the shrine of
Apollo in Delos, have been cut down by the academic persons to whom
power is given.  The grass and flowers have been rooted up.  Hideous
little wooden fences enclose the grave slabs:  a roof of a massive
kind has been dumped down on the old walls, and the windows, once so
graceful in their airy lines, have been glazed in a horrible manner,
while the ugly iron gate precludes entrance to a shrine which is now
a black and dismal dungeon.


"Oh, be that roof as lead to lead
Above the dull Restorer's head,
A Minstrel's malison is said!"


Notes explanatory are added to the Rhymes, and their information,
however valuable, need not here be repeated.



A BALLADE OF XXXII BALLADES.



Friend, when you bear a care-dulled eye,
And brow perplexed with things of weight,
And fain would bid some charm untie
The bonds that hold you all too strait,
Behold a solace to your fate,
Wrapped in this cover's china blue;
These ballades fresh and delicate,
This dainty troop of Thirty-two!

The mind, unwearied, longs to fly
And commune with the wise and great;
But that same ether, rare and high,
Which glorifies its worthy mate,
To breath forspent is disparate:
Laughing and light and airy-new
These come to tickle the dull pate,
This dainty troop of Thirty-two.

Most welcome then, when you and I,
Forestalling days for mirth too late,
To quips and cranks and fantasy
Some choice half-hour dedicate,
They weave their dance with measured rate
Of rhymes enlinked in order due,
Till frowns relax and cares abate,
This dainty troop of Thirty-two.

ENVOY.

Princes, of toys that please your state
Quainter are surely none to view
Than these which pass with tripping gait,
This dainty troop of Thirty-two.

F. P.



TO
AUSTIN DOBSON.
Un Livre est un ami qui change--quelquefois.
1880.
1888



BALLADE TO THEOCRITUS, IN WINTER.
[Greek text which cannot be reproduced]
Id. viii. 56.



Ah! leave the smoke, the wealth, the roar
Of London, and the bustling street,
For still, by the Sicilian shore,
The murmur of the Muse is sweet.
Still, still, the suns of summer greet
The mountain-grave of Helike,
And shepherds still their songs repeat
Where breaks the blue Sicilian sea.

What though they worship Pan no more,
That guarded once the shepherd's seat,
They chatter of their rustic lore,
They watch the wind among the wheat:
Cicalas chirp, the young lambs bleat,
Where whispers pine to cypress tree;
They count the waves that idly beat
Where breaks the blue Sicilian sea.

Theocritus! thou canst restore
The pleasant years, and over-fleet;
With thee we live as men of yore,
We rest where running waters meet:
And then we turn unwilling feet
And seek the world--so must it be -
WE may not linger in the heat
Where breaks the blue Sicilian sea!

ENVOY.

Master,--when rain, and snow, and sleet
And northern winds are wild, to thee
We come, we rest in thy retreat,
Where breaks the blue Sicilian sea!



BALLADE OF CLEOPATRA'S NEEDLE.



Ye giant shades of RA and TUM,
Ye ghosts of gods Egyptian,
If murmurs of our planet come
To exiles in the precincts wan
Where, fetish or Olympian,
To help or harm no more ye list,
Look down, if look ye may, and scan
This monument in London mist!

Behold, the hieroglyphs are dumb
That once were read of him that ran
When seistron, cymbal, trump, and drum
Wild music of the Bull began;
When through the chanting priestly clan
Walk'd Ramses, and the high sun kiss'd
This stone, with blessing scored and ban -
This monument in London mist.

The stone endures though gods be numb;
Though human effort, plot, and plan
Be sifted, drifted, like the sum
Of sands in wastes Arabian.
What king may deem him more than man,
What priest says Faith can Time resist
While THIS endures to mark their span -
This monument in London mist?

ENVOY.

Prince, the stone's shade on your divan
Falls; it is longer than ye wist:
It preaches, as Time's gnomon can,
This monument in London mist!



BALLADE OF ROULETTE.
TO R. R.



This life--one was thinking to-day,
In the midst of a medley of fancies -
Is a game, and the board where we play
Green earth with her poppies and pansies.
Let manque be faded romances,
Be passe remorse and regret;
Hearts dance with the wheel as it dances -
The wheel of Dame Fortune's roulette.

The lover will stake as he may
His heart on his Peggies and Nancies;
The girl has her beauty to lay;
The saint has his prayers and his trances;
The poet bets endless expanses
In Dreamland; the scamp has his debt:
How they gaze at the wheel as it glances -
The wheel of Dame Fortune's roulette!

The Kaiser will stake his array
Of sabres, of Krupps, and of lances;
An Englishman punts with his pay,
And glory the jeton of France is;
Your artists, or Whistlers or Vances,
Have voices or colours to bet;
Will you moan that its motion askance is -
The wheel of Dame Fortune's roulette?

ENVOY.

The prize that the pleasure enhances?
The prize is--at last to forget
The changes, the chops, and the chances -
The wheel of Dame Fortune's roulette.



BALLADE OF SLEEP.



The hours are passing slow,
I hear their weary tread
Clang from the tower, and go
Back to their kinsfolk dead.
Sleep! death's twin brother dread!
Why dost thou scorn me so?
The wind's voice overhead
Long wakeful here I know,
And music from the steep
Where waters fall and flow.
Wilt thou not hear sue, Sleep?

All sounds that might bestow
Rest on the fever'd bed,
All slumb'rous sounds and low
Are mingled here and wed,
And bring no drowsihed.
Shy dreams flit to and fro
With shadowy hair dispread;
With wistful eyes that glow,
And silent robes that sweep.
Thou wilt not hear me; no?
Wilt thou not hear me, Sleep?

What cause hast thou to show
Of sacrifice unsped?
Of all thy slaves below
I most have laboured
With service sung and said;
Have cull'd such buds as blow,
Soft poppies white and red,
Where thy still gardens grow,
And Lethe's waters weep.
Why, then, art thou my foe?
Wilt thou not hear me, Sleep?

ENVOY.

Prince, ere the dark be shred
By golden shafts, ere now
And long the shadows creep:
Lord of the wand of lead,
Soft-footed as the snow,
Wilt thou not hear me, Sleep!



BALLADE OF THE MIDNIGHT FOREST.
AFTER THEODORE DE BANVILLE.



Still sing the mocking fairies, as of old,
Beneath the shade of thorn and holly-tree;
The west wind breathes upon them, pure and cold,
And wolves still dread Diana roaming free
In secret woodland with her company.
'Tis thought the peasants' hovels know her rite
When now the wolds are bathed in silver light,
And first the moonrise breaks the dusky grey,
Then down the dells, with blown soft hair and bright,
And through the dim wood Dian threads her way.

With water-weeds twined in their locks of gold
The strange cold forest-fairies dance in glee,
Sylphs over-timorous and over-bold
Haunt the dark hollows where the dwarf may be,
The wild red dwarf, the nixies' enemy;
Then 'mid their mirth, and laughter, and affright,
The sudden Goddess enters, tall and white,
With one long sigh for summers pass'd away;
The swift feet tear the ivy nets outright
And through the dim wood Dian threads her way.

She gleans her silvan trophies; down the wold
She hears the sobbing of the stags that flee
Mixed with the music of the hunting roll'd,
But her delight is all in archery,
And naught of ruth and pity wotteth she
More than her hounds that follow on the flight;
The goddess draws a golden bow of might
And thick she rains the gentle shafts that slay.
She tosses loose her locks upon the night,
And through the dim wood Dian threads her way.

ENVOY.

Prince, let us leave the din, the dust, the spite,
The gloom and glare of towns, the plague, the blight:
Amid the forest leaves and fountain spray
There is the mystic home of our delight,
And through the dim wood Dian threads her way.



BALLADE OF THE TWEED.
(LOWLAND SCOTCH.)
TO T. W. LANG.



The ferox rins in rough Loch Awe,
A weary cry frae ony toun;
The Spey, that loups o'er linn and fa',
They praise a' ither streams aboon;
They boast their braes o' bonny Doon:
Gie ME to hear the ringing reel,
Where shilfas sing, and cushats croon
By fair Tweed-side, at Ashiesteel!

There's Ettrick, Meggat, Ail, and a',
Where trout swim thick in May and June;
Ye'll see them take in showers o' snaw
Some blinking, cauldrife April noon:
Rax ower the palmer and march-broun,
And syne we'll show a bonny creel,
In spring or simmer, late or soon,
By fair Tweed-side, at Ashiesteel!

There's mony a water, great or sma',
Gaes singing in his siller tune,
Through glen and heugh, and hope and shaw,
Beneath the sun-licht or the moon:
But set us in our fishing-shoon
Between the Caddon-burn and Peel,
And syne we'll cross the heather broun
By fair Tweed-side at Ashiesteel!

ENVOY.

Deil take the dirty, trading loon
Wad gar the water ca' his wheel,
And drift his dyes and poisons doun
By fair Tweed-side at Ashiesteel!



BALLADE OF THE BOOK-HUNTER.



In torrid heats of late July,
In March, beneath the bitter bise,
He book-hunts while the loungers fly, -
He book-hunts, though December freeze;
In breeches baggy at the knees,
And heedless of the public jeers,
For these, for these, he hoards his fees, -
Aldines, Bodonis, Elzevirs.

No dismal stall escapes his eye,
He turns o'er tomes of low degrees,
There soiled romanticists may lie,
Or Restoration comedies;
Each tract that flutters in the breeze
For him is charged with hopes and fears,
In mouldy novels fancy sees
Aldines, Bodonis, Elzevirs.

With restless eyes that peer and spy,
Sad eyes that heed not skies nor trees,
In dismal nooks he loves to pry,
Whose motto evermore is Spes!
But ah! the fabled treasure flees;
Grown rarer with the fleeting years,
In rich men's shelves they take their ease, -
Aldines, Bodonis, Elzevirs!

ENVOY.

Prince, all the things that tease and please, -
Fame, hope, wealth, kisses, cheers, and tears,
What are they but such toys as these -
Aldines, Bodonis, Elzevirs?



BALLADE OF THE VOYAGE TO CYTHERA.
AFTER THEODORE DE BANVILLE.



I know Cythera long is desolate;
I know the winds have stripp'd the gardens green.
Alas, my friends! beneath the fierce sun's weight
A barren reef lies where Love's flowers have been,
Nor ever lover on that coast is seen!
So be it, but we seek a fabled shore,
To lull our vague desires with mystic lore,
To wander where Love's labyrinths beguile;
There let us land, there dream for evermore:
"It may be we shall touch the happy isle."

The sea may be our sepulchre.  If Fate,
If tempests wreak their wrath on us, serene
We watch the bolt of heaven, and scorn the hate
Of angry gods that smite us in their spleen.
Perchance the jealous mists are but the screen
That veils the fairy coast we would explore.
Come, though the sea be vex'd, and breakers roar,
Come, for the air of this old world is vile,
Haste we, and toil, and faint not at the oar;
"It may be we shall touch the happy isle."

Grey serpents trail in temples desecrate
Where Cypris smiled, the golden maid, the queen,
And ruined is the palace of our state;
But happy Loves flit round the mast, and keen
The shrill wind sings the silken cords between.
Heroes are we, with wearied hearts and sore,
Whose flower is faded and whose locks are hoar,
Yet haste, light skiffs, where myrtle thickets smile;
Love's panthers sleep 'mid roses, as of yore:
"It may be we shall touch the happy isle!"

ENVOY.

Sad eyes! the blue sea laughs, as heretofore.
Ah, singing birds your happy music pour!
Ah, poets, leave the sordid earth awhile;
Flit to these ancient gods we still adore:
"It may be we shall touch the happy isle!"



BALLADE OF THE SUMMER TERM.
(Being a Petition, in the form of a Ballade, praying the University
Commissioners to spare the Summer Term.)



When Lent and Responsions are ended,
When May with fritillaries waits,
When the flower of the chestnut is splendid,
When drags are at all of the gates
(Those drags the philosopher "slates"
With a scorn that is truly sublime), {1}
Life wins from the grasp of the Fates
Sweet hours and the fleetest of time!

When wickets are bowl'd and defended,
When Isis is glad with "the Eights,"
When music and sunset are blended,
When Youth and the summer are mates,
When Freshmen are heedless of "Greats,"
And when note-books are cover'd with rhyme,
Ah, these are the hours that one rates -
Sweet hours and the fleetest of time!

When the brow of the Dean is unbended
At luncheons and mild tete-a-tetes,
When the Tutor's in love, nor offended
By blunders in tenses or dates;
When bouquets are purchased of Bates,
When the bells in their melody chime,
When unheeded the Lecturer prates -
Sweet hours and the fleetest of time!

ENVOY.

Reformers of Schools and of States,
Is mirth so tremendous a crime?
Ah! spare what grim pedantry hates -
Sweet hours and the fleetest of time!



BALLADE OF THE MUSE
Quem tu, Melpomene, semel.



The man whom once, Melpomene,
Thou look'st on with benignant sight,
Shall never at the Isthmus be
A boxer eminent in fight,
Nor fares he foremost in the flight
Of Grecian cars to victory,
Nor goes with Delian laurels dight,
The man thou lov'st, Melpomene!

Not him the Capitol shall see,
As who hath crush'd the threats and might
Of monarchs, march triumphantly;
But Fame shall crown him, in his right
Of all the Roman lyre that smite
The first; so woods of Tivoli
Proclaim him, so her waters bright,
The man thou lov'st, Melpomene!

The sons of queenly Rome count ME,
Me too, with them whose chants delight, -
The poets' kindly company;
Now broken is the tooth of spite,
But thou, that temperest aright
The golden lyre, all, all to thee
He owes--life, fame, and fortune's height -
The man thou lov'st, Melpomene!

ENVOY.

Queen, that to mute lips could'st unite
The wild swan's dying melody!
Thy gifts, ah! how shall he requite -
The man thou lov'st, Melpomene?



BALLADE AGAINST THE JESUITS.
AFTER LA FONTAINE.



Rome does right well to censure all the vain
Talk of Jansenius, and of them who preach
That earthly joys are damnable!  'Tis plain
We need not charge at Heaven as at a breach;
No, amble on!  We'll gain it, one and all;
The narrow path's a dream fantastical,
And Arnauld's quite superfluously driven
Mirth from the world.  We'll scale the heavenly wall,
Escobar makes a primrose path to heaven!

He does not hold a man may well be slain
Who vexes with unseasonable speech,
You MAY do murder for five ducats gain,
NOT for a pin, a ribbon, or a peach;
He ventures (most consistently) to teach
That there are certain cases that befall
When perjury need no good man appal,
And life of love (he says) may keep a leaven.
Sure, hearing this, a grateful world will bawl,
"Escobar makes a primrose path to heaven!"

"For God's sake read me somewhat in the strain
Of his most cheering volumes, I beseech!"
Why should I name them all? a mighty train -
So many, none may know the name of each.
Make these your compass to the heavenly beach,
These only in your library instal:
Burn Pascal and his fellows, great and small,
Dolts that in vain with Escobar have striven;
I tell you, and the common voice doth call,
Escobar makes a primrose path to heaven!

ENVOY.

SATAN, that pride did hurry to thy fall,
Thou porter of the grim infernal hall -
Thou keeper of the courts of souls unshriven!
To shun thy shafts, to 'scape thy hellish thrall,
Escobar makes a primrose path to heaven!



BALLADE OF DEAD CITIES.
TO E. W. GOSSE.



The dust of Carthage and the dust
Of Babel on the desert wold,
The loves of Corinth, and the lust,
Orchomenos increased with gold;
The town of Jason, over-bold,
And Cherson, smitten in her prime -
What are they but a dream half-told?
Where are the cities of old time?

In towns that were a kingdom's trust,
In dim Atlantic forests' fold,
The marble wasteth to a crust,
The granite crumbles into mould;
O'er these--left nameless from of old -
As over Shinar's brick and slime,
One vast forgetfulness is roll'd -
Where are the cities of old time?

The lapse of ages, and the rust,
The fire, the frost, the waters cold,
Efface the evil and the just;
From Thebes, that Eriphyle sold,
To drown'd Caer-Is, whose sweet bells toll'd
Beneath the wave a dreamy chime
That echo'd from the mountain-hold, -
"Where are the cities of old time?"

ENVOY.

Prince, all thy towns and cities must
Decay as these, till all their crime,
And mirth, and wealth, and toil are thrust
Where are the cities of old time.



BALLADE OF THE ROYAL GAME OF GOLF.
(EAST FIFESHIRE.)



There are laddies will drive ye a ba'
To the burn frae the farthermost tee,
But ye mauna think driving is a',
Ye may heel her, and send her ajee,
Ye may land in the sand or the sea;
And ye're dune, sir, ye're no worth a preen,
Tak' the word that an auld man'll gie,
Tak' aye tent to be up on the green!

The auld folk are crouse, and they craw
That their putting is pawky and slee;
In a bunker they're nae gude ava',
But to girn, and to gar the sand flee.
And a lassie can putt--ony she, -
Be she Maggy, or Bessie, or Jean,
But a cleek-shot's the billy for me,
Tak' aye tent to be up on the green!

I hae play'd in the frost and the thaw,
I hae play'd since the year thirty-three,
I hae play'd in the rain and the snaw,
And I trust I may play till I dee;
And I tell ye the truth and nae lee,
For I speak o' the thing I hae seen -
Tom Morris, I ken, will agree -
Tak' aye tent to be up on the green!

ENVOY.

Prince, faith you're improving a wee,
And, Lord, man, they tell me you're keen;
Tak' the best o' advice that can be,
Tak' aye tent to be up on the green!



DOUBLE BALLADE OF PRIMITIVE MAN.
TO J. A. FARRER.



He lived in a cave by the seas,
He lived upon oysters and foes,
But his list of forbidden degrees,
An extensive morality shows;
Geological evidence goes
To prove he had never a pan,
But he shaved with a shell when he chose, -
'Twas the manner of Primitive Man.

He worshipp'd the rain and the breeze,
He worshipp'd the river that flows,
And the Dawn, and the Moon, and the trees,
And bogies, and serpents, and crows;
He buried his dead with their toes
Tucked-up, an original plan,
Till their knees came right under their nose, -
'Twas the manner of Primitive Man.

His communal wives, at his ease,
He would curb with occasional blows;
Or his State had a queen, like the bees
(As another philosopher trows):
When he spoke, it was never in prose,
But he sang in a strain that would scan,
For (to doubt it, perchance, were morose)
'Twas the manner of Primitive Man!

On the coasts that incessantly freeze,
With his stones, and his bones, and his bows;
On luxuriant tropical leas,
Where the summer eternally glows,
He is found, and his habits disclose
(Let theology say what she can)
That he lived in the long, long agos,
'Twas the manner of Primitive Man!

From a status like that of the Crees,
Our society's fabric arose, -
Develop'd, evolved, if you please,
But deluded chronologists chose,
In a fancied accordance with Mos
es, 4000 B. C. for the span
When he rushed on the world and its woes, -
'Twas the manner of Primitive Man!

But the mild anthropologist,--HE'S
Not RECENT inclined to suppose
Flints Palaeolithic like these,
Quaternary bones such as those!
In Rhinoceros, Mammoth and Co.'s,
First epoch, the Human began,
Theologians all to expose, -
'Tis the MISSION of Primitive Man.

ENVOY.

MAX, proudly your Aryans pose,
But their rigs they undoubtedly ran,
For, as every Darwinian knows,
'Twas the manner of Primitive Man! {2}



BALLADE OF AUTUMN.



We built a castle in the air,
In summer weather, you and I,
The wind and sun were in your hair, -
Gold hair against a sapphire sky:
When Autumn came, with leaves that fly
Before the storm, across the plain,
You fled from me, with scarce a sigh -
My Love returns no more again!

The windy lights of Autumn flare:
I watch the moonlit sails go by;
I marvel how men toil and fare,
The weary business that they ply!
Their voyaging is vanity,
And fairy gold is all their gain,
And all the winds of winter cry,
"My Love returns no more again!"

Here, in my castle of Despair,
I sit alone with memory;
The wind-fed wolf has left his lair,
To keep the outcast company.
The brooding owl he hoots hard by,
The hare shall kindle on thy hearth-stane,
The Rhymer's soothest prophecy,--{3}
My Love returns no more again!

ENVOY.

Lady, my home until I die
Is here, where youth and hope were slain:
They flit, the ghosts of our July,
My Love returns no more again!



BALLADE OF TRUE WISDOM.



While others are asking for beauty or fame,
Or praying to know that for which they should pray,
Or courting Queen Venus, that affable dame,
Or chasing the Muses the weary and grey,
The sage has found out a more excellent way -
To Pan and to Pallas his incense he showers,
And his humble petition puts up day by day,
For a house full of books, and a garden of flowers.

Inventors may bow to the God that is lame,
And crave from the fire on his stithy a ray;
Philosophers kneel to the God without name,
Like the people of Athens, agnostics are they;
The hunter a fawn to Diana will slay,
The maiden wild roses will wreathe for the Hours;
But the wise man will ask, ere libation he pay,
For a house full of books, and a garden of flowers.

Oh! grant me a life without pleasure or blame
(As mortals count pleasure who rush through their day
With a speed to which that of the tempest is tame)!
O grant me a house by the beach of a bay,
Where the waves can be surly in winter, and play
With the sea-weed in summer, ye bountiful powers!
And I'd leave all the hurry, the noise, and the fray,
For a house full of books, and a garden of flowers.

ENVOY.

Gods, grant or withhold it; your "yea" and your "nay"
Are immutable, heedless of outcry of ours:
But life IS worth living, and here we would stay
For a house full of books, and a garden of flowers.



BALLADE OF WORLDLY WEALTH.
(OLD FRENCH.)



Money taketh town and wall,
Fort and ramp without a blow;
Money moves the merchants all,
While the tides shall ebb and flow;
Money maketh Evil show
Like the Good, and Truth like lies:
These alone can ne'er bestow
Youth, and health, and Paradise.

Money maketh festival,
Wine she buys, and beds can strow;
Round the necks of captains tall,
Money wins them chains to throw,
Marches soldiers to and fro,
Gaineth ladies with sweet eyes:
These alone can ne'er bestow
Youth, and health, and Paradise.

Money wins the priest his stall;
Money mitres buys, I trow,
Red hats for the Cardinal,
Abbeys for the novice low;
Money maketh sin as snow,
Place of penitence supplies:
These alone can ne'er bestow
Youth, and health, and Paradise.



BALLADE OF LIFE.
"'Dead and gone,'--a sorry burden of the Ballad of Life."
Death's Jest Book.



Say, fair maids, maying
In gardens green,
In deep dells straying,
What end hath been
Two Mays between
Of the flowers that shone
And your own sweet queen -
"They are dead and gone!"

Say, grave priests, praying
In dule and teen,
From cells decaying
What have ye seen
Of the proud and mean,
Of Judas and John,
Of the foul and clean? -
"They are dead and gone!"

Say, kings, arraying
Loud wars to win,
Of your manslaying
What gain ye glean?
"They are fierce and keen,
But they fall anon,
On the sword that lean, -
They are dead and gone!"

ENVOY.

Through the mad world's scene,
We are drifting on,
To this tune, I ween,
"They are dead and gone!"



BALLADE OF BLUE CHINA.



There's a joy without canker or cark,
There's a pleasure eternally new,
'Tis to gloat on the glaze and the mark
Of china that's ancient and blue;
Unchipp'd all the centuries through
It has pass'd, since the chime of it rang,
And they fashion'd it, figure and hue,
In the reign of the Emperor Hwang.

These dragons (their tails, you remark,
Into bunches of gillyflowers grew), -
When Noah came out of the ark,
Did these lie in wait for his crew?
They snorted, they snapp'd, and they slew,
They were mighty of fin and of fang,
And their portraits Celestials drew
In the reign of the Emperor Hwang.

Here's a pot with a cot in a park,
In a park where the peach-blossoms blew,
Where the lovers eloped in the dark,
Lived, died, and were changed into two
Bright birds that eternally flew
Through the boughs of the may, as they sang:
'Tis a tale was undoubtedly true
In the reign of the Emperor Hwang.

ENVOY.

Come, snarl at my ecstasies, do,
Kind critic, your "tongue has a tang"
But--a sage never heeded a shrew
In the reign of the Emperor Hwang.



BALLADE OF DEAD LADIES.
(AFTER VILLON.)



Nay, tell me now in what strange air
The Roman Flora dwells to-day.
Where Archippiada hides, and where
Beautiful Thais has passed away?
Whence answers Echo, afield, astray,
By mere or stream,--around, below?
Lovelier she than a woman of clay;
Nay, but where is the last year's snow?

Where is wise Heloise, that care
Brought on Abeilard, and dismay?
All for her love he found a snare,
A maimed poor monk in orders grey;
And where's the Queen who willed to slay
Buridan, that in a sack must go
Afloat down Seine,--a perilous way -
Nay, but where is the last year's snow?

Where's that White Queen, a lily rare,
With her sweet song, the Siren's lay?
Where's Bertha Broad-foot, Beatrice fair?
Alys and Ermengarde, where are they?
Good Joan, whom English did betray
In Rouen town, and burned her?  No,
Maiden and Queen, no man may say;
Nay, but where is the last year's snow?

ENVOY.

Prince, all this week thou need'st not pray,
Nor yet this year the thing to know.
One burden answers, ever and aye,
"Nay, but where is the last year's snow?"



VILLON'S BALLADE
OF GOOD COUNSEL, TO HIS FRIENDS OF EVIL LIFE.



Nay, be you pardoner or cheat,
Or cogger keen, or mumper shy,
You'll burn your fingers at the feat,
And howl like other folks that fry.
All evil folks that love a lie!
And where goes gain that greed amasses,
By wile, and trick, and thievery?
'Tis all to taverns and to lasses!

Rhyme, rail, dance, play the cymbals sweet,
With game, and shame, and jollity,
Go jigging through the field and street,
With MYST'RY and MORALITY;
Win gold at GLEEK,--and that will fly,
Where all you gain at PASSAGE passes, -
And that's?  You know as well as I,
'Tis all to taverns and to lasses!

Nay, forth from all such filth retreat,
Go delve and ditch, in wet or dry,
Turn groom, give horse and mule their meat,
If you've no clerkly skill to ply;
You'll gain enough, with husbandry,
But--sow hempseed and such wild grasses,
And where goes all you take thereby? -
'Tis all to taverns and to lasses!

ENVOY.

Your clothes, your hose, your broidery,
Your linen that the snow surpasses,
Or ere they're worn, off, off they fly,
'Tis all to taverns and to lasses!



BALLADE OF THE BOOKWORM.



Far in the Past I peer, and see
A Child upon the Nursery floor,
A Child with books upon his knee,
Who asks, like Oliver, for more!
The number of his years is IV,
And yet in Letters hath he skill,
How deep he dives in Fairy-lore!
The Books I loved, I love them still!

One gift the Fairies gave me:  (Three
They commonly bestowed of yore)
The Love of Books, the Golden Key
That opens the Enchanted Door;
Behind it BLUEBEARD lurks, and o'er
And o'er doth JACK his Giants kill,
And there is all ALADDIN'S store, -
The Books I loved, I love them still!

Take all, but leave my Books to me!
These heavy creels of old we bore
We fill not now, nor wander free,
Nor wear the heart that once we wore;
Not now each River seems to pour
His waters from the Muses' hill;
Though something's gone from stream and shore,
The Books I loved, I love them still!

ENVOY.

Fate, that art Queen by shore and sea,
We bow submissive to thy will,
Ah grant, by some benign decree,
The Books I loved--to love them still.



VALENTINE IN FORM OF BALLADE.



The soft wind from the south land sped,
He set his strength to blow,
From forests where Adonis bled,
And lily flowers a-row:
He crossed the straits like streams that flow,
The ocean dark as wine,
To my true love to whisper low,
To be your Valentine.

The Spring half-raised her drowsy head,
Besprent with drifted snow,
"I'll send an April day," she said,
"To lands of wintry woe."
He came,--the winter's overthrow
With showers that sing and shine,
Pied daisies round your path to strow,
To be your Valentine.

Where sands of Egypt, swart and red,
'Neath suns Egyptian glow,
In places of the princely dead,
By the Nile's overflow,
The swallow preened her wings to go,
And for the North did pine,
And fain would brave the frost her foe,
To be your Valentine.

ENVOY.

Spring, Swallow, South Wind, even so,
Their various voice combine;
But that they crave on ME bestow,
To be your Valentine.



BALLADE OF OLD PLAYS.
(Les OEuvres de Monsieur Moliere.  A Paris, chez Louys Billaine, a
la Palme.  M.D.C. LXVI.)



LA COUR.

When these Old Plays were new, the King,
Beside the Cardinal's chair,
Applauded, 'mid the courtly ring,
The verses of Moliere;
Point-lace was then the only wear,
Old Corneille came to woo,
And bright Du Parc was young and fair,
When these Old Plays were new!

LA COMEDIE.

How shrill the butcher's cat-calls ring,
How loud the lackeys swear!
Black pipe-bowls on the stage they fling,
At Brecourt, fuming there!
The Porter's stabbed! a Mousquetaire
Breaks in with noisy crew -
'Twas all a commonplace affair
When these Old Plays were new!

LA VILLE.

When these Old Plays were new!  They bring
A host of phantoms rare:
Old jests that float, old jibes that sting,
Old faces peaked with care:
Menage's smirk, de Vise's stare,
The thefts of Jean Ribou,--{4}
Ah, publishers were hard to bear
When these Old Plays were new.

ENVOY.

Ghosts, at your Poet's word ye dare
To break Death's dungeons through,
And frisk, as in that golden air,
When these Old Plays were new!



BALLADE OF HIS BOOKS.



Here stand my books, line upon line
They reach the roof, and row by row,
They speak of faded tastes of mine,
And things I did, but do not, know:
Old school books, useless long ago,
Old Logics, where the spirit, railed in,
Could scarcely answer "yes" or "no" -
The many things I've tried and failed in!

Here's Villon, in morocco fine,
(The Poet starved, in mud and snow,)
Glatigny does not crave to dine,
And Rene's tears forget to flow.
And here's a work by Mrs. Crowe,
With hosts of ghosts and bogies jailed in;
Ah, all my ghosts have gone below -
The many things I've tried and failed in!

He's touched, this mouldy Greek divine,
The Princess D'Este's hand of snow;
And here the arms of D'Hoym shine,
And there's a tear-bestained Rousseau:
Here's Carlyle shrieking "woe on woe"
(The first edition, this, he wailed in);
I once believed in him--but oh,
The many things I've tried and failed in!

ENVOY.

Prince, tastes may differ; mine and thine
Quite other balances are scaled in;
May you succeed, though I repine -
"The many things I've tried and failed in!"



BALLADE OF THE DREAM.



Swift as sound of music fled
When no more the organ sighs,
Sped as all old days are sped,
So your lips, love, and your eyes,
So your gentle-voiced replies
Mine one hour in sleep that seem,
Rise and flit when slumber flies,
Following darkness like a dream!

Like the scent from roses red,
Like the dawn from golden skies,
Like the semblance of the dead
From the living love that hies,
Like the shifting shade that lies
On the moonlight-silvered stream,
So you rise when dreams arise,
Following darkness like a dream!

Could some spell, or sung or said,
Could some kindly witch and wise,
Lull for aye this dreaming head
In a mist of memories,
I would lie like him who lies
Where the lights on Latmos gleam, -
Wake not, find not Paradise
Following darkness like a dream!

ENVOY.

Sleep, that giv'st what Life denies,
Shadowy bounties and supreme,
Bring the dearest face that flies
Following darkness like a dream!



BALLADE OF THE SOUTHERN CROSS.



Fair islands of the silver fleece,
Hoards of unsunned, uncounted gold,
Whose havens are the haunts of Peace,
Whose boys are in our quarrel bold;
OUR bolt is shot, our tale is told,
Our ship of state in storms may toss,
But ye are young if we are old,
Ye Islands of the Southern Cross!

Ay, WE must dwindle and decrease,
Such fates the ruthless years unfold;
And yet we shall not wholly cease,
We shall not perish unconsoled;
Nay, still shall Freedom keep her hold
Within the sea's inviolate fosse,
And boast her sons of English mould,
Ye Islands of the Southern Cross!

All empires tumble--Rome and Greece -
Their swords are rust, their altars cold!
For us, the Children of the Seas,
Who ruled where'er the waves have rolled,
For us, in Fortune's books enscrolled,
I read no runes of hopeless loss;
Nor--while YE last--our knell is tolled,
Ye Islands of the Southern Cross!

ENVOY.

Britannia, when thy hearth's a-cold,
When o'er thy grave has grown the moss,
Still Rule Australia shall be trolled
In Islands of the Southern Cross!



BALLADE OF AUCASSIN



Where smooth the southern waters run
By rustling leagues of poplars grey,
Beneath a veiled soft southern sun,
We wandered out of yesterday,
Went maying through that ancient May
Whose fallen flowers are fragrant yet,
And loitered by the fountain spray
With Aucassin and Nicolette.

The grass-grown paths are trod of none
Where through the woods they went astray.
The spider's traceries are spun
Across the darkling forest way.
There come no knights that ride to slay,
No pilgrims through the grasses wet,
No shepherd lads that sang their say
With Aucassin and Nicolette!

'Twas here by Nicolette begun
Her bower of boughs and grasses gay;
'Scaped from the cell of marble dun
'Twas here the lover found the fay,
Ah, lovers fond! ah, foolish play!
How hard we find it to forget
Who fain would dwell with them as they,
With Aucassin and Nicolette.

ENVOY.

Prince, 'tis a melancholy lay!
For youth, for love we both regret.
How fair they seem, how far away,
With Aucassin and Nicolette!



BALLADE AMOUREUSE.
AFTER FROISSART.



Not Jason nor Medea wise,
I crave to see, nor win much lore,
Nor list to Orpheus' minstrelsies;
Nor Her'cles would I see, that o'er
The wide world roamed from shore to shore;
Nor, by St. James, Penelope, -
Nor pure Lucrece, such wrong that bore:
To see my Love suffices me!

Virgil and Cato, no man vies
With them in wealth of clerkly store;
I would not see them with mine eyes;
Nor him that sailed, sans sail nor oar,
Across the barren sea and hoar,
And all for love of his ladye;
Nor pearl nor sapphire takes me more:
To see my Love suffices me!

I heed not Pegasus, that flies
As swift as shafts the bowmen pour;
Nor famed Pygmalion's artifice,
Whereof the like was ne'er before;
Nor Oleus, that drank of yore
The salt wave of the whole great sea:
Why? dost thou ask?  'Tis as I swore -
To see my Love suffices me!



BALLADE OF QUEEN ANNE.



The modish Airs,
The Tansey Brew,
The SWAINS and FAIRS
In curtained Pew;
Nymphs KNELLER drew,
Books BENTLEY read, -
Who knows them, who?
QUEEN ANNE is dead!

We buy her Chairs,
Her China blue,
Her red-brick Squares
We build anew;
But ah! we rue,
When all is said,
The tale o'er-true,
QUEEN ANNE is dead!

Now BULLS and BEARS,
A ruffling Crew,
With Stocks and Shares,
With Turk and Jew,
Go bubbling through
The Town ill-bred:
The World's askew,
QUEEN ANNE is dead!

ENVOY.

Friend, praise the new;
The old is fled:
Vivat FROU-FROU!
QUEEN ANNE is dead!



BALLADE OF BLIND LOVE.
(AFTER LYONNET DE COISMES.)



Who have loved and ceased to love, forget
That ever they loved in their lives, they say;
Only remember the fever and fret,
And the pain of Love, that was all his pay;
All the delight of him passes away
From hearts that hoped, and from lips that met -
Too late did I love you, my love, and yet
I shall never forget till my dying day.

Too late were we 'ware of the secret net
That meshes the feet in the flowers that stray;
There were we taken and snared, Lisette,
In the dungeon of La Fausse Amistie;
Help was there none in the wide world's fray,
Joy was there none in the gift and the debt;
Too late we knew it, too long regret -
I shall never forget till my dying day!

We must live our lives, though the sun be set,
Must meet in the masque where parts we play,
Must cross in the maze of Life's minuet;
Our yea is yea, and our nay is nay:
But while snows of winter or flowers of May
Are the sad year's shroud or coronet,
In the season of rose or of violet,
I shall never forget till my dying day!

ENVOY.

Queen, when the clay is my coverlet,
When I am dead, and when you are grey,
Vow, where the grass of the grave is wet,
"I shall never forget till my dying day!"



BALLADE OF HIS CHOICE OF A SEPULCHRE.



Here I'd come when weariest!
   Here the breast
Of the Windburg's tufted over
Deep with bracken; here his crest
   Takes the west,
Where the wide-winged hawk doth hover.

Silent here are lark and plover;
   In the cover
Deep below the cushat best
Loves his mate, and croons above her
   O'er their nest,
Where the wide-winged hawk doth hover.

Bring me here, Life's tired-out guest,
   To the blest
Bed that waits the weary rover,
Here should failure be confessed;
   Ends my quest,
Where the wide-winged hawk doth hover!

ENVOY.

Friend, or stranger kind, or lover,
Ah, fulfil a last behest,
   Let me rest
Where the wide-winged hawk doth hover!



DIZAIN.



As, to the pipe, with rhythmic feet
In windings of some old-world dance,
The smiling couples cross and meet,
Join hands, and then in line advance,
So, to these fair old tunes of France,
Through all their maze of to-and-fro,
The light-heeled numbers laughing go,
Retreat, return, and ere they flee,
One moment pause in panting row,
And seem to say--Vos plaudite!

A.D.



ORONTE--Ce ne sont point de ces grands vers pompeux,
Mais de petits vers!
"Le Misanthrope," Acte i., Sc. 2.



A PORTRAIT OF 1783.



Your hair and chin are like the hair
And chin Burne-Jones's ladies wear;
You were unfashionably fair
   In '83;
And sad you were when girls are gay,
You read a book about Le vrai
Merite de l'homme, alone in May.
What CAN it be,
Le vrai merite de l'homme?  Not gold,
Not titles that are bought and sold,
Not wit that flashes and is cold,
   But Virtue merely!
Instructed by Jean-Jacques Rousseau
(And Jean-Jacques, surely, ought to know),
You bade the crowd of foplings go,
   You glanced severely,
Dreaming beneath the spreading shade
Of 'that vast hat the Graces made;' {5}
So Rouget sang--while yet he played
   With courtly rhyme,
And hymned great Doisi's red perruque,
And Nice's eyes, and Zulme's look,
And dead canaries, ere he shook
   The sultry time
With strains like thunder.  Loud and low
Methinks I hear the murmur grow,
The tramp of men that come and go
   With fire and sword.
They war against the quick and dead,
Their flying feet are dashed with red,
As theirs the vintaging that tread
   Before the Lord.
O head unfashionably fair,
What end was thine, for all thy care?
We only see thee dreaming there:
   We cannot see
The breaking of thy vision, when
The Rights of Man were lords of men,
When virtue won her own again
   In '93.



THE MOON'S MINION.
(FROM THE PROSE OF C. BAUDELAIRE.)



Thine eyes are like the sea, my dear,
   The wand'ring waters, green and grey;
Thine eyes are wonderful and clear,
   And deep, and deadly, even as they;
The spirit of the changeful sea
   Informs thine eyes at night and noon,
She sways the tides, and the heart of thee,
   The mystic, sad, capricious Moon!

The Moon came down the shining stair
   Of clouds that fleck the summer sky,
She kissed thee, saying, "Child, be fair,
   And madden men's hearts, even as I;
Thou shalt love all things strange and sweet,
   That know me and are known of me;
The lover thou shalt never meet,
   The land where thou shalt never be!"

She held thee in her chill embrace,
   She kissed thee with cold lips divine,
She left her pallor on thy face,
   That mystic ivory face of thine;
And now I sit beside thy feet,
   And all my heart is far from thee,
Dreaming of her I shall not meet,
   And of the land I shall not see!



IN ITHACA.



"And now am I greatly repenting that ever I left my life with thee,
and the immortality thou didst promise me."--Letter of Odysseus to
Calypso.  Luciani Vera Historia.

'Tis thought Odysseus when the strife was o'er
   With all the waves and wars, a weary while,
   Grew restless in his disenchanted isle,
And still would watch the sunset, from the shore,
Go down the ways of gold, and evermore
   His sad heart followed after, mile on mile,
   Back to the Goddess of the magic wile,
Calypso, and the love that was of yore.

Thou too, thy haven gained, must turn thee yet
   To look across the sad and stormy space,
   Years of a youth as bitter as the sea,
Ah, with a heavy heart, and eyelids wet,
   Because, within a fair forsaken place
   The life that might have been is lost to thee.



HOMER.



Homer, thy song men liken to the sea
   With all the notes of music in its tone,
   With tides that wash the dim dominion
Of Hades, and light waves that laugh in glee
Around the isles enchanted; nay, to me
   Thy verse seems as the River of source unknown
   That glasses Egypt's temples overthrown
In his sky-nurtured stream, eternally.

No wiser we than men of heretofore
   To find thy sacred fountains guarded fast;
Enough, thy flood makes green our human shore,
   As Nilus Egypt, rolling down his vast
His fertile flood, that murmurs evermore
   Of gods dethroned, and empires in the past.



THE BURIAL OF MOLIERE.
(AFTER J. TRUFFIER.)



Dead--he is dead!  The rouge has left a trace
   On that thin cheek where shone, perchance, a tear,
   Even while the people laughed that held him dear
But yesterday.  He died,--and not in grace,
And many a black-robed caitiff starts apace
   To slander him whose Tartuffe made them fear,
   And gold must win a passage for his bier,
And bribe the crowd that guards his resting-place.

Ah, Moliere, for that last time of all,
   Man's hatred broke upon thee, and went by,
And did but make more fair thy funeral.
   Though in the dark they hid thee stealthily,
Thy coffin had the cope of night for pall,
   For torch, the stars along the windy sky!



BION.



The wail of Moschus on the mountains crying
   The Muses heard, and loved it long ago;
They heard the hollows of the hills replying,
   They heard the weeping water's overflow;
They winged the sacred strain--the song undying,
   The song that all about the world must go, -
When poets for a poet dead are sighing,
   The minstrels for a minstrel friend laid low.

And dirge to dirge that answers, and the weeping
   For Adonais by the summer sea,
The plaints for Lycidas, and Thyrsis (sleeping
   Far from 'the forest ground called Thessaly'),
These hold thy memory, Bion, in their keeping,
   And are but echoes of the moan for thee.



SPRING.
(AFTER MELEAGER.)



Now the bright crocus flames, and now
   The slim narcissus takes the rain,
And, straying o'er the mountain's brow,
   The daffodilies bud again.
   The thousand blossoms wax and wane
On wold, and heath, and fragrant bough,
But fairer than the flowers art thou,
   Than any growth of hill or plain.

Ye gardens, cast your leafy crown,
That my Love's feet may tread it down,
   Like lilies on the lilies set:
My Love, whose lips are softer far
Than drowsy poppy petals are,
   And sweeter than the violet!



BEFORE THE SNOW.
(AFTER ALBERT GLATIGNY.)



The winter is upon us, not the snow,
   The hills are etched on the horizon bare,
   The skies are iron grey, a bitter air,
The meagre cloudlets shudder to and fro.
One yellow leaf the listless wind doth blow,
   Like some strange butterfly, unclassed and rare.
   Your footsteps ring in frozen alleys, where
The black trees seem to shiver as you go.

Beyond lie church and steeple, with their old
   And rusty vanes that rattle as they veer,
A sharper gust would shake them from their hold,
   Yet up that path, in summer of the year,
And past that melancholy pile we strolled
   To pluck wild strawberries, with merry cheer.



VILLANELLE.
TO LUCIA.



Apollo left the golden Muse
   And shepherded a mortal's sheep,
Theocritus of Syracuse!

To mock the giant swain that woo's
   The sea-nymph in the sunny deep,
Apollo left the golden Muse.

Afield he drove his lambs and ewes,
   Where Milon and where Battus reap,
Theocritus of Syracuse!

To watch thy tunny-fishers cruise
   Below the dim Sicilian steep
Apollo left the golden Muse.

Ye twain did loiter in the dews,
   Ye slept the swain's unfever'd sleep,
Theocritus of Syracuse!

That Time might half with HIS confuse
   Thy songs,--like his, that laugh and leap, -
Theocritus of Syracuse,
   Apollo left the golden Muse!



NATURAL THEOLOGY.
[Greek text which cannot be reproduced] OD. III. 47.



"Once CAGN was like a father, kind and good,
   But He was spoiled by fighting many things;
He wars upon the lions in the wood,
   And breaks the Thunder-bird's tremendous wings;
But still we cry to Him,--'We are thy brood -
   O Cagn, be merciful!' and us He brings
To herds of elands, and great store of food,
   And in the desert opens water-springs."

So Qing, King Nqsha's Bushman hunter, spoke,
   Beside the camp-fire, by the fountain fair,
When all were weary, and soft clouds of smoke
   Were fading, fragrant, in the twilit air:
And suddenly in each man's heart there woke
   A pang, a sacred memory of prayer.



THE ODYSSEY.



As one that for a weary space has lain
   Lulled by the song of Circe and her wine
   In gardens near the pale of Proserpine,
Where that AEaean isle forgets the main,
And only the low lutes of love complain,
   And only shadows of wan lovers pine,
   As such an one were glad to know the brine
Salt on his lips, and the large air again, -
So gladly, from the songs of modern speech
   Men turn, and see the stars, and feel the free
      Shrill wind beyond the close of heavy flowers,
      And through the music of the languid hours,
They hear like ocean on a western beach
   The surge and thunder of the Odyssey.



IDEAL.



Suggested by a female head in wax, of unknown date, but supposed to
be either of the best Greek age, or a work of Raphael or Leonardo.
It is now in the Lille Museum.

Ah, mystic child of Beauty, nameless maid,
   Dateless and fatherless, how long ago,
A Greek, with some rare sadness overweighed,
   Shaped thee, perchance, and quite forgot his woe!
   Or Raphael thy sweetness did bestow,
While magical his fingers o'er thee strayed,
   Or that great pupil taught of Verrocchio
Redeemed thy still perfection from the shade

That hides all fair things lost, and things unborn,
   Where one has fled from me, that wore thy grace,
   And that grave tenderness of thine awhile;
Nay, still in dreams I see her, but her face
   Is pale, is wasted with a touch of scorn,
   And only on thy lips I find her smile.



THE FAIRY'S GIFT.
"Take short views."--SYDNEY SMITH.



The Fays that to my christ'ning came
   (For come they did, my nurses taught me),
They did not bring me wealth or fame,
   'Tis very little that they brought me.
But one, the crossest of the crew,
   The ugly old one, uninvited,
Said, "I shall be avenged on YOU,
   My child; you shall grow up short-sighted!"
With magic juices did she lave
   Mine eyes, and wrought her wicked pleasure.
Well, of all gifts the Fairies gave,
   HERS is the present that I treasure!

The bore whom others fear and flee,
   I do not fear, I do not flee him;
I pass him calm as calm can be;
   I do not cut--I do not see him!
And with my feeble eyes and dim,
   Where YOU see patchy fields and fences,
For me the mists of Turner swim -
   MY "azure distance" soon commences!
Nay, as I blink about the streets
   Of this befogged and miry city,
Why, almost every girl one meets
   Seems preternaturally pretty!
"Try spectacles," one's friends intone;
   "You'll see the world correctly through them."
But I have visions of my own,
   And not for worlds would I undo them.



BENEDETTA RAMUS.
AFTER ROMNEY.



Mysterious Benedetta! who
That Reynolds or that Romney drew
Was ever half so fair as you,
   Or is so well forgot?
These eyes of melancholy brown,
These woven locks, a shadowy crown,
Must surely have bewitched the town;
   Yet you're remembered not.

Through all that prattle of your age,
Through lore of fribble and of sage
I've read, and chiefly Walpole's page,
   Wherein are beauties famous;
I've haunted ball, and rout, and sale;
I've heard of Devonshire and Thrale,
And all the Gunnings' wondrous tale,
   But nothing of Miss Ramus.

And yet on many a lattice pane
'Fair Benedetta,' scrawled in vain
By lovers' diamonds, must remain
   To tell us you were cruel. {6}
But who, of all that sighed and swore -
Wits, poets, courtiers by the score -
Did win and on his bosom wore
   This hard and lovely jewel?

Why, dilettante records say
An Alderman, who came that way,
Woo'd you and made you Lady Day;
   You crowned his civic flame.
It suits a melancholy song
To think your heart had suffered wrong,
And that you lived not very long
   To be a City dame!

Perchance you were a Mourning Bride,
And conscious of a heart that died
With one who fell by Rodney's side
   In blood-stained Spanish bays.
Perchance 'twas no such thing, and you
Dwelt happy with your knight and true,
And, like Aurora, watched a crew
   Of rosy little Days!

Oh, lovely face and innocent!
Whatever way your fortunes went,
And if to earth your life was lent
   For little space or long,
In your kind eyes we seem to see
What Woman at her best may be,
And offer to your memory
   An unavailing song!



PARTANT POUR LA SCRIBIE.
[Scribie, on the north-east littoral of Bohemia, is the land of
stage conventions.  It is named after the discoverer, M. Scribe.]



A pleasant land is Scribie, where
   The light comes mostly from below,
And seems a sort of symbol rare
   Of things at large, and how they go,
In rooms where doors are everywhere
   And cupboards shelter friend or foe.

This is a realm where people tell
   Each other, when they chance to meet,
Of things that long ago befell -
   And do most solemnly repeat
Secrets they both know very well,
   Aloud, and in the public street!

A land where lovers go in fours,
   Master and mistress, man and maid;
Where people listen at the doors
   Or 'neath a table's friendly shade,
And comic Irishmen in scores
   Roam o'er the scenes all undismayed:

A land where Virtue in distress
   Owes much to uncles in disguise;
Where British sailors frankly bless
   Their limbs, their timbers, and their eyes;
And where the villain doth confess,
   Conveniently, before he dies!

A land of lovers false and gay;
   A land where people dread a "curse;"
A land of letters gone astray,
   Or intercepted, which is worse;
Where weddings false fond maids betray,
   And all the babes are changed at nurse.

Oh, happy land, where things come right!
   We of the world where things go ill;
Where lovers love, but don't unite;
   Where no one finds the Missing Will -
Dominion of the heart's delight,
   Scribie, we've loved, and love thee still!



ST. ANDREW'S BAY.



NIGHT.

Ah, listen through the music, from the shore,
The "melancholy long-withdrawing roar";
Beneath the Minster, and the windy caves,
The wide North Ocean, marshalling his waves
Even so forlorn--in worlds beyond our ken -
May sigh the seas that are not heard of men;
Even so forlorn, prophetic of man's fate,
Sounded the cold sea-wave disconsolate,
When none but God might hear the boding tone,
As God shall hear the long lament alone,
When all is done, when all the tale is told,
And the gray sea-wave echoes as of old!

MORNING.

This was the burden of the Night,
   The saying of the sea,
But lo! the hours have brought the light,
The laughter of the waves, the flight
Of dipping sea-birds, foamy white,
   That are so glad to be!
"Forget!" the happy creatures cry,
   "Forget Night's monotone,
With us be glad in sea and sky,
The days are thine, the days that fly,
The days God gives to know him by,
   And not the Night alone!"



WOMAN AND THE WEED.
(FOUNDED ON A NEW ZEALAND MYTH.)



In the Morning of Time, when his fortunes began,
How bleak, how un-Greek, was the Nature of Man!
From his wigwam, if ever he ventured to roam,
There was nobody waiting to welcome him home;
For the Man had been made, but the woman had NOT,
And Earth was a highly detestable spot.
Man hated his neighbours; they met and they scowled,
They did not converse but they struggled and howled,
For Man had no tact--he would ne'er take a hint,
And his notions he backed with a hatchet of flint.

So Man was alone, and he wished he could see
On the Earth some one like him, but fairer than he,
With locks like the red gold, a smile like the sun,
To welcome him back when his hunting was done.
And he sighed for a voice that should answer him still,
Like the affable Echo he heard on the hill:
That should answer him softly and always agree,
AND OH, Man reflected, HOW NICE IT WOULD BE!

So he prayed to the Gods, and they stooped to his prayer,
And they spoke to the Sun on his way through the air,
And he married the Echo one fortunate morn,
And Woman, their beautiful daughter, was born!
The daughter of Sunshine and Echo she came
With a voice like a song, with a face like a flame;
With a face like a flame, and a voice like a song,
And happy was Man, but it was not for long!

For weather's a painfully changeable thing,
Not always the child of the Echo would sing;
And the face of the Sun may be hidden with mist,
And his child can be terribly cross if she list.
And unfortunate Man had to learn with surprise
That a frown's not peculiar to masculine eyes;
That the sweetest of voices can scold and can sneer,
And cannot be answered--like men--with a spear.

So Man went and called to the Gods in his woe,
And they answered him--"Sir, you would needs have it so:
And the thing must go on as the thing has begun,
She's immortal--your child of the Echo and Sun.
But we'll send you another, and fairer is she,
This maiden with locks that are flowing and free.
This maiden so gentle, so kind, and so fair,
With a flower like a star in the night of her hair.
With her eyes like the smoke that is misty and blue,
With her heart that is heavenly, and tender, and true.
She will die in the night, but no need you should mourn,
You shall bury her body and thence shall be born
A weed that is green, that is fragrant and fair,
With a flower like the star in the night of her hair.
And the leaves must ye burn till they offer to you
Soft smoke, like her eyes that are misty and blue.

"And the smoke shall ye breathe and no more shall ye fret,
But the child of the Echo and Sun shall forget:
Shall forget all the trouble and torment she brings,
Shall bethink ye of none but delectable things;
And the sound of the wars with your brethren shall cease,
While ye smoke by the camp-fire the great pipe of peace."
So the last state of Man was by no means the worst,
The second gift softened the sting of the first.

Nor the child of the Echo and Sun doth he heed
When he dreams with the Maid that was changed to the weed;
Though the Echo be silent, the Sun in a mist,
The Maid is the fairest that ever was kissed.
And when tempests are over and ended the rain,
And the child of the Sunshine is sunny again,
He comes back, glad at heart, and again is at one
With the changeable child of the Echo and Sun.



Footnotes:

{1}  Cf. "Suggestions for Academic Reorganization."

{2}  The last three stanzas are by an eminent Anthropologist.

{3}  Thomas of Ercildoune.

{4}  A knavish publisher.

{5}  Vous y verrez, belle Julie,
Que ce chapeau tout maltraite
Fut, dans un instant de folie,
Par les Graces meme invente.

'A Julie.'  Essais en Prose et en Vers, par Joseph Lisle; Paris.
An. V. de la Republique.

{6}  "I have broken many a pane of glass marked Cruel Parthenissa,"
says the aunt of Sophia Western in Tom Jones.










This etext was produced by Donald Lainson, charlie@idirect.com.





BLACK ROCK

A TALE OF THE SELKIRKS

by Ralph Connor




INTRODUCTION


I think I have met "Ralph Conner."  Indeed, I am sure I have--once
in a canoe on the Red River, once on the Assinaboine, and twice or
thrice on the prairies to the West.  That was not the name he gave
me, but, if I am right, it covers one of the most honest and genial
of the strong characters that are fighting the devil and doing good
work for men all over the world.  He has seen with his own eyes the
life which he describes in this book, and has himself, for some
years of hard and lonely toil, assisted in the good influences which
he traces among its wild and often hopeless conditions.  He writes
with the freshness and accuracy of an eye-witness, with the style
(as I think his readers will allow) of a real artist, and with the
tenderness and hopefulness of a man not only of faith but of
experience, who has seen in fulfillment the ideals for which he
lives.

The life to which he takes us, though far off and very strange to
our tame minds, is the life of our brothers.  Into the Northwest of
Canada the young men of Great Britain and Ireland have been pouring
(I was told), sometimes at the rate of 48,000 a year.  Our brothers
who left home yesterday--our hearts cannot but follow them.  With
these pages Ralph Conner enables our eyes and our minds to follow,
too; nor do I think there is any one who shall read this book and
not find also that his conscience is quickened.  There is a warfare
appointed unto man upon earth, and its struggles are nowhere more
intense, nor the victories of the strong, nor the succors brought
to the fallen, more heroic, than on the fields described in this
volume.

GEORGE ADAM SMITH.



BLACK ROCK


The story of the book is true, and chief of the failures in the
making of the book is this, that it is not all the truth.  The
light is not bright enough, the shadow is not black enough to give
a true picture of that bit of Western life of which the writer was
some small part.  The men of the book are still there in the mines
and lumber camps of the mountains, fighting out that eternal fight
for manhood, strong, clean, God-conquered.  And, when the west
winds blow, to the open ear the sounds of battle come, telling the
fortunes of the fight.

Because a man's life is all he has, and because the only hope of
the brave young West lies in its men, this story is told.  It may
be that the tragic pity of a broken life may move some to pray, and
that that divine power there is in a single brave heart to summon
forth hope and courage may move some to fight.  If so, the tale is
not told in vain.

C.W.G.



CONTENTS


CHAPTER I

CHRISTMAS EVE IN A LUMBER CAMP


CHAPTER II

THE BLACK ROCK CHRISTMAS


CHAPTER III

WATERLOO.  OUR FIGHT--HIS VICTORY


CHAPTER IV

MRS. MAVOR'S STORY


CHAPTER V

THE MAKING OF THE LEAGUE


CHAPTER VI

BLACK ROCK RELIGION


CHAPTER VII

THE FIRST BLACK ROCK COMMUNION


CHAPTER VIII

THE BREAKING OF THE LEAGUE


CHAPTER IX

THE LEAGUE'S REVENGE


CHAPTER X

WHAT CAME TO SLAVIN


CHAPTER XI

THE TWO CALLS


CHAPTER XII

LOVE IS NOT ALL


CHAPTER XIII

HOW NELSON CAME HOME


CHAPTER XIV

GRAEME'S NEW BIRTH


CHAPTER XV

COMING TO THEIR OWN




CHAPTER I


CHRISTMAS EVE IN A LUMBER CAMP


It was due to a mysterious dispensation of Providence, and a good
deal to Leslie Graeme, that I found myself in the heart of the
Selkirks for my Christmas Eve as the year 1882 was dying.  It had
been my plan to spend my Christmas far away in Toronto, with such
Bohemian and boon companions as could be found in that cosmopolitan
and kindly city.  But Leslie Graeme changed all that, for,
discovering me in the village of Black Rock, with my traps all
packed, waiting for the stage to start for the Landing, thirty
miles away, he bore down upon me with resistless force, and I found
myself recovering from my surprise only after we had gone in his
lumber sleigh some six miles on our way to his camp up in the
mountains.  I was surprised and much delighted, though I would not
allow him to think so, to find that his old-time power over me was
still there.  He could always in the old 'Varsity days--dear, wild
days--make me do what he liked.  He was so handsome and so
reckless, brilliant in his class-work, and the prince of half-backs
on the Rugby field, and with such power of fascination, as would
'extract the heart out of a wheelbarrow,' as Barney Lundy used to
say.  And thus it was that I found myself just three weeks later--I
was to have spent two or three days,--on the afternoon of the 24th
of December, standing in Graeme's Lumber Camp No. 2, wondering at
myself.  But I did not regret my changed plans, for in those three
weeks I had raided a cinnamon bear's den and had wakened up a
grizzly--  But I shall let the grizzly finish the tale; he probably
sees more humour in it than I.

The camp stood in a little clearing, and consisted of a group of
three long, low shanties with smaller shacks near them, all built
of heavy, unhewn logs, with door and window in each.  The grub
camp, with cook-shed attached, stood in the middle of the clearing;
at a little distance was the sleeping-camp with the office built
against it, and about a hundred yards away on the other side of the
clearing stood the stables, and near them the smiddy.  The
mountains rose grandly on every side, throwing up their great peaks
into the sky.  The clearing in which the camp stood was hewn out of
a dense pine forest that filled the valley and climbed half way up
the mountain-sides, and then frayed out in scattered and stunted
trees.

It was one of those wonderful Canadian winter days, bright, and
with a touch of sharpness in the air that did not chill, but warmed
the blood like draughts of wine.  The men were up in the woods, and
the shrill scream of the blue jay flashing across the open, the
impudent chatter of the red squirrel from the top of the grub camp,
and the pert chirp of the whisky-jack, hopping about on the
rubbish-heap, with the long, lone cry of the wolf far down the
valley, only made the silence felt the more.

As I stood drinking in with all my soul the glorious beauty and the
silence of mountain and forest, with the Christmas feeling stealing
into me, Graeme came out from his office, and, catching sight of
me, called out, 'Glorious Christmas weather, old chap!'  And then,
coming nearer, 'Must you go to-morrow?'

'I fear so,' I replied, knowing well that the Christmas feeling was
on him too.

'I wish I were going with you,' he said quietly.

I turned eagerly to persuade him, but at the look of suffering in
his face the words died at my lips, for we both were thinking of
the awful night of horror when all his bright, brilliant life
crashed down about him in black ruin and shame.  I could only throw
my arm over his shoulder and stand silent beside him.  A sudden
jingle of bells roused him, and, giving himself a little shake, he
exclaimed, 'There are the boys coming home.'

Soon the camp was filled with men talking, laughing, chaffing, like
light-hearted boys.

'They are a little wild to-night,' said Graeme; 'and to morrow
they'll paint Black Rock red.'

Before many minutes had gone, the last teamster was 'washed up,'
and all were standing about waiting impatiently for the cook's
signal--the supper to-night was to be 'something of a feed'--when
the sound of bells drew their attention to a light sleigh drawn by
a buckskin broncho coming down the hillside at a great pace.

'The preacher, I'll bet, by his driving,' said one of the men.

'Bedad, and it's him has the foine nose for turkey!' said Blaney, a
good-natured, jovial Irishman.

'Yes, or for pay-day, more like,' said Keefe, a black-browed,
villainous fellow-countryman of Blaney's, and, strange to say, his
great friend.

Big Sandy M'Naughton, a Canadian Highlander from Glengarry, rose up
in wrath.  'Bill Keefe,' said he, with deliberate emphasis, 'you'll
just keep your dirty tongue off the minister; and as for your pay,
it's little he sees of it, or any one else, except Mike Slavin,
when you're too dry to wait for some one to treat you, or perhaps
Father Ryan, when the fear of hell-fire is on to you.'

The men stood amazed at Sandy's sudden anger and length of speech.

'Bon; dat's good for you, my bully boy,' said Baptiste, a wiry
little French-Canadian, Sandy's sworn ally and devoted admirer ever
since the day when the big Scotsman, under great provocation, had
knocked him clean off the dump into the river and then jumped in
for him.

It was not till afterwards I learned the cause of Sandy's sudden
wrath which urged him to such unwonted length of speech.  It was
not simply that the Presbyterian blood carried with it reverence
for the minister and contempt for Papists and Fenians, but that he
had a vivid remembrance of how, only a month ago, the minister had
got him out of Mike Slavin's saloon and out the clutches of Keefe
and Slavin and their gang of bloodsuckers.

Keefe started up with a curse.  Baptiste sprang to Sandy's side,
slapped him on the back, and called out, 'You keel him, I'll hit
(eat) him up, me.'

It looked as if there might be a fight, when a harsh voice said in
a low, savage tone, 'Stop your row, you blank fools; settle it, if
you want to, somewhere else.'  I turned, and was amazed to see old
man Nelson, who was very seldom moved to speech.

There was a look of scorn on his hard, iron-grey face, and of such
settled fierceness as made me quite believe the tales I had heard
of his deadly fights in the mines at the coast.  Before any reply
could be made, the minister drove up and called out in a cheery
voice, 'Merry Christmas, boys!  Hello, Sandy!  Comment ca va,
Baptiste?  How do you do, Mr. Graeme?'

'First rate.  Let me introduce my friend, Mr. Connor, sometime
medical student, now artist, hunter, and tramp at large, but not a
bad sort.'

'A man to be envied,' said the minister, smiling.  'I am glad to
know any friend of Mr. Graeme's.'

I liked Mr. Craig from the first.  He had good eyes that looked
straight out at you, a clean-cut, strong face well set on his
shoulders, and altogether an upstanding, manly bearing.  He
insisted on going with Sandy to the stables to see Dandy, his
broncho, put up.

'Decent fellow,' said Graeme; 'but though he is good enough to his
broncho, it is Sandy that's in his mind now.'

'Does he come out often?  I mean, are you part of his parish, so to
speak?'

'I have no doubt he thinks so; and I'm blowed if he doesn't make
the Presbyterians of us think so too.'  And he added after a pause,
'A dandy lot of parishioners we are for any man.  There's Sandy,
now, he would knock Keefe's head off as a kind of religious
exercise; but to-morrow Keefe will be sober, and Sandy will be
drunk as a lord, and the drunker he is the better Presbyterian
he'll be; to the preacher's disgust.'  Then after another pause he
added bitterly, 'But it is not for me to throw rocks at Sandy; I am
not the same kind of fool, but I am a fool of several other sorts.'

Then the cook came out and beat a tattoo on the bottom of a dish-
pan.  Baptiste answered with a yell: but though keenly hungry, no
man would demean himself to do other than walk with apparent
reluctance to his place at the table.  At the further end of the
camp was a big fireplace, and from the door to the fireplace
extended the long board tables, covered with platters of turkey not
too scientifically carved, dishes of potatoes, bowls of apple
sauce, plates of butter, pies, and smaller dishes distributed at
regular intervals.  Two lanterns hanging from the roof, and a row
of candles stuck into the wall on either side by means of slit
sticks, cast a dim, weird light over the scene.

There was a moment's silence, and at a nod from Graeme Mr. Craig
rose and said, 'I don't know how you feel about it, men, but to me
this looks good enough to be thankful for.'

'Fire ahead, sir,' called out a voice quite respectfully, and the
minister bent his head and said--

'For Christ the Lord who came to save us, for all the love and
goodness we have known, and for these Thy gifts to us this
Christmas night, our Father, make us thankful.  Amen.'

'Bon, dat's fuss rate,' said Baptiste.  'Seems lak dat's make me
hit (eat) more better for sure,' and then no word was spoken for
quarter of an hour.  The occasion was far too solemn and moments
too precious for anything so empty as words.  But when the white
piles of bread and the brown piles of turkey had for a second time
vanished, and after the last pie had disappeared, there came a
pause and hush of expectancy, whereupon the cook and cookee, each
bearing aloft a huge, blazing pudding, came forth.

'Hooray!' yelled Blaney, 'up wid yez!' and grabbing the cook by the
shoulders from behind, he faced him about.

Mr. Craig was the first to respond, and seizing the cookee in the
same way, called out, 'Squad, fall in! quick march!'  In a moment
every man was in the procession.

'Strike up, Batchees, ye little angel!' shouted Blaney, the
appellation a concession to the minister's presence; and away went
Baptiste in a rollicking French song with the English chorus--


     'Then blow, ye winds, in the morning,
        Blow, ye winds, ay oh!
      Blow, ye winds, in the morning,
        Blow, blow, blow.'


And at each 'blow' every boot came down with a thump on the plank
floor that shook the solid roof.  After the second round, Mr.
Craig jumped upon the bench, and called out--

'Three cheers for Billy the cook!'

In the silence following the cheers Baptiste was heard to say,
'Bon! dat's mak me feel lak hit dat puddin' all hup mesef, me.'

'Hear till the little baste!' said Blaney in disgust.

'Batchees,' remonstrated Sandy gravely, 'ye've more stomach than
manners.'

'Fu sure! but de more stomach dat's more better for dis puddin','
replied the little Frenchman cheerfully.

After a time the tables were cleared and pushed back to the wall,
and pipes were produced.  In all attitudes suggestive of comfort
the men disposed themselves in a wide circle about the fire, which
now roared and crackled up the great wooden chimney hanging from
the roof.  The lumberman's hour of bliss had arrived.  Even old man
Nelson looked a shade less melancholy than usual as he sat alone,
well away from the fire, smoking steadily and silently.  When the
second pipes were well a-going, one of the men took down a violin
from the wall and handed it to Lachlan Campbell.  There were two
brothers Campbell just out from Argyll, typical Highlanders:
Lachlan, dark, silent, melancholy, with the face of a mystic, and
Angus, red-haired, quick, impulsive, and devoted to his brother, a
devotion he thought proper to cover under biting, sarcastic speech.

Lachlan, after much protestation, interspersed with gibes from his
brother, took the violin, and, in response to the call from all
sides, struck up 'Lord Macdonald's Reel.'  In a moment the floor
was filled with dancers, whooping and cracking their fingers in the
wildest manner.  Then Baptiste did the 'Red River Jig,' a most
intricate and difficult series of steps, the men keeping time to
the music with hands and feet.

When the jig was finished, Sandy called for 'Lochaber No More'; but
Campbell said, 'No, no! I cannot play that to-night.  Mr. Craig
will play.'

Craig took the violin, and at the first note I knew he was no
ordinary player.  I did not recognise the music, but it was soft
and thrilling, and got in by the heart, till every one was thinking
his tenderest and saddest thoughts.

After he had played two or three exquisite bits, he gave Campbell
his violin, saying, 'Now, "Lochaber," Lachlan.'

Without a word Lachlan began, not 'Lochaber'--he was not ready for
that yet--but 'The Flowers o' the Forest,' and from that wandered
through 'Auld Robin Gray' and 'The Land o' the Leal,' and so got at
last to that most soul-subduing of Scottish laments, 'Lochaber No
More.'  At the first strain, his brother, who had thrown himself on
some blankets behind the fire, turned over on his face, feigning
sleep.  Sandy M'Naughton took his pipe out of his mouth, and sat up
straight and stiff, staring into vacancy, and Graeme, beyond the
fire, drew a short, sharp breath.  We had often sat, Graeme and I,
in our student-days, in the drawing-room at home, listening to his
father wailing out 'Lochaber' upon the pipes, and I well knew that
the awful minor strains were now eating their way into his soul.

Over and over again the Highlander played his lament.  He had long
since forgotten us, and was seeing visions of the hills and lochs
and glens of his far-away native land, and making us, too, see
strange things out of the dim past.  I glanced at old man Nelson,
and was startled at the eager, almost piteous, look in his eyes,
and I wished Campbell would stop.  Mr. Craig caught my eye, and,
stepping over to Campbell, held out his hand for the violin.
Lingeringly and lovingly the Highlander drew out the last strain,
and silently gave the minister his instrument.

Without a moment's pause, and while the spell of 'Lochaber' was
still upon us, the minister, with exquisite skill, fell into the
refrain of that simple and beautiful camp-meeting hymn, 'The Sweet
By and By.'  After playing the verse through once, he sang softly
the refrain.  After the first verse, the men joined in the chorus;
at first timidly, but by the time the third verse was reached they
were shouting with throats full open, 'We shall meet on that
beautiful shore.'  When I looked at Nelson the eager light had gone
out of his eyes, and in its place was kind of determined
hopelessness, as if in this new music he had no part.

After the voices had ceased, Mr. Craig played again the refrain,
more and more softly and slowly; then laying the violin on
Campbell's knees, he drew from his pocket his little Bible, and
said--

'Men, with Mr. Graeme's permission, I want to read you something
this Christmas Eve.  You will all have heard it before, but you
will like it none the less for that.'

His voice was soft, but clear and penetrating, as he read the
eternal story of the angels and the shepherds and the Babe.  And as
he read, a slight motion of the hand or a glance of an eye made us
see, as he was seeing, that whole radiant drama.  The wonder, the
timid joy, the tenderness, the mystery of it all, were borne in
upon us with overpowering effect.  He closed the book, and in the
same low, clear voice went on to tell us how, in his home years
ago, he used to stand on Christmas Eve listening in thrilling
delight to his mother telling him the story, and how she used to
make him see the shepherds and hear the sheep bleating near by, and
how the sudden burst of glory used to make his heart jump.

'I used to be a little afraid of the angels, because a boy told me
they were ghosts; but my mother told me better, and I didn't fear
them any more.  And the Baby, the dear little Baby--we all love a
baby.'  There was a quick, dry sob; it was from Nelson.  'I used to
peek through under to see the little one in the straw, and wonder
what things swaddling clothes were.  Oh, it was all so real and so
beautiful!'  He paused, and I could hear the men breathing.

'But one Christmas Eve,' he went on, in a lower, sweeter tone,
'there was no one to tell me the story, and I grew to forget it,
and went away to college, and learned to think that it was only a
child's tale and was not for men.  Then bad days came to me and
worse, and I began to lose my grip of myself, of life, of hope, of
goodness, till one black Christmas, in the slums of a faraway city,
when I had given up all, and the devil's arms were about me, I
heard the story again.  And as I listened, with a bitter ache in my
heart, for I had put it all behind me, I suddenly found myself
peeking under the shepherds' arms with a child's wonder at the Baby
in the straw.  Then it came over me like great waves, that His name
was Jesus, because it was He that should save men from their sins.
Save!  Save!  The waves kept beating upon my ears, and before I
knew, I had called out, "Oh! can He save me?"  It was in a little
mission meeting on one of the side streets, and they seemed to be
used to that sort of thing there, for no one was surprised; and a
young fellow leaned across the aisle to me and said, "Why! you just
bet He can!"  His surprise that I should doubt, his bright face and
confident tone, gave me hope that perhaps it might be so.  I held
to that hope with all my soul, and'--stretching up his arms, and
with a quick glow in his face and a little break in his voice, 'He
hasn't failed me yet; not once, not once!'

He stopped quite short, and I felt a good deal like making a fool
of myself, for in those days I had not made up my mind about these
things.  Graeme, poor old chap, was gazing at him with a sad
yearning in his dark eyes; big Sandy was sitting very stiff, and
staring harder than ever into the fire; Baptiste was trembling with
excitement; Blaney was openly wiping the tears away.  But the face
that held my eyes was that of old man Nelson.  It was white,
fierce, hungry-looking, his sunken eyes burning, his lips parted as
if to cry.

The minister went on.  'I didn't mean to tell you this, men, it all
came over me with a rush; but it is true, every word, and not a
word will I take back.  And, what's more, I can tell you this, what
He did for me He can do for any man, and it doesn't make any
difference what's behind him, and'--leaning slightly forward, and
with a little thrill of pathos vibrating in his voice--'O boys, why
don't you give Him a chance at you?  Without Him you'll never be
the men you want to be, and you'll never get the better of that
that's keeping some of you now from going back home.  You know
you'll never go back till you're the men you want to be.'  Then,
lifting up his face and throwing back his head, he said, as if to
himself, 'Jesus!  He shall save His people from their sins,' and
then, 'Let us pray.'

Graeme leaned forward with his face in his hands; Baptiste and
Blaney dropped on their knees; Sandy, the Campbells, and some
others, stood up.  Old man Nelson held his eyes steadily on the
minister.

Only once before had I seen that look on a human face.  A young
fellow had broken through the ice on the river at home, and as the
black water was dragging his fingers one by one from the slippery
edges, there came over his face that same look.  I used to wake up
for many a night after in a sweat of horror, seeing the white face
with its parting lips, and its piteous, dumb appeal, and the black
water slowly sucking it down.

Nelson's face brought it all back; but during the prayer the face
changed, and seemed to settle into resolve of some sort, stern,
almost gloomy, as of a man with his last chance before him.

After the prayer Mr. Craig invited the men to a Christmas dinner
next day in Black Rock.  'And because you are an independent lot,
we'll charge you half a dollar for dinner and the evening show.'
Then leaving a bundle of magazines and illustrated papers on the
table--a godsend to the men--he said good-bye and went out.

I was to go with the minister, so I jumped into the sleigh first,
and waited while he said good-bye to Graeme, who had been hard hit
by the whole service, and seemed to want to say something.  I heard
Mr. Craig say cheerfully and confidently, 'It's a true bill: try
Him.'

Sandy, who had been steadying Dandy while that interesting broncho
was attempting with great success to balance himself on his hind
legs, came to say good-bye.  'Come and see me first thing, Sandy.'

'Ay! I know; I'll see ye, Mr. Craig,' said Sandy earnestly, as
Dandy dashed off at a full gallop across the clearing and over the
bridge, steadying down when he reached the hill.

'Steady, you idiot!'

This was to Dandy, who had taken a sudden side spring into the deep
snow, almost upsetting us.  A man stepped out from the shadow.  It
was old man Nelson.  He came straight to the sleigh, and, ignoring
my presence completely, said--

'Mr. Craig, are you dead sure of this?  Will it work?'

'Do you mean,' said Craig, taking him up promptly, 'can Jesus
Christ save you from your sins and make a man of you?'

The old man nodded, keeping his hungry eyes on the other's face.

'Well, here's His message to you: "The Son of Man is come to seek
and to save that which was lost."'

'To me?  To me?' said the old man eagerly.

'Listen; this, too, is His Word: "Him that cometh unto Me I will in
no wise cast out."  That's for you, for here you are, coming.'

'You don't know me, Mr. Craig.  I left my baby fifteen years ago
because--'

'Stop!' said the minister.  'Don't tell me, at least not to-night;
perhaps never.  Tell Him who knows it all now, and who never
betrays a secret.  Have it out with Him.  Don't be afraid to trust
Him.'

Nelson looked at him, with his face quivering, and said in a husky
voice, 'If this is no good, it's hell for me.'

'If it is no good,' replied Craig, almost sternly, 'it's hell for
all of us.'

The old man straightened himself up, looked up at the stars, then
back at Mr. Craig, then at me, and, drawing a deep breath, said,
'I'll try Him.'  As he was turning away the minister touched him on
the arm, and said quietly, 'Keep an eye on Sandy to-morrow.'

Nelson nodded, and we went on; but before we took the next turn I
looked back and saw what brought a lump into my throat.  It was old
man Nelson on his knees in the snow, with his hands spread upward
to the stars, and I wondered if there was any One above the stars,
and nearer than the stars, who could see.  And then the trees hid
him from my sight


CHAPTER II

THE BLACK ROCK CHRISTMAS


Many strange Christmas Days have I seen, but that wild Black Rock
Christmas stands out strangest of all.  While I was revelling in my
delicious second morning sleep, just awake enough to enjoy it, Mr.
Craig came abruptly, announcing breakfast and adding, 'Hope you are
in good shape, for we have our work before us this day.'

'Hello!' I replied, still half asleep, and anxious to hide from the
minister that I was trying to gain a few more moments of snoozing
delight, 'what's abroad?'.

'The devil,' he answered shortly, and with such emphasis that I sat
bolt upright, looking anxiously about.

'Oh! no need for alarm.  He's not after you particularly--at least
not to-day,' said Craig, with a shadow of a smile.  'But he is
going about in good style, I can tell you.'

By this time I was quite awake.  'Well, what particular style does
His Majesty affect this morning?'

He pulled out a showbill.  'Peculiarly gaudy and effective, is it
not?'

The items announced were sufficiently attractive.  The 'Frisco
Opera Company were to produce the 'screaming farce,' 'The Gay and
Giddy Dude'; after which there was to be a 'Grand Ball,' during
which the 'Kalifornia Female Kickers' were to do some fancy
figures; the whole to be followed by a 'big supper' with 'two free
drinks to every man and one to the lady,' and all for the
insignificant sum of two dollars.

'Can't you go one better?' I said.

He looked inquiringly and a little disgustedly at me.

'What can you do against free drinks and a dance, not to speak of
the "High Kickers"?' he groaned.

'No!' he continued; 'it's a clean beat for us today.  The miners
and lumbermen will have in their pockets ten thousand dollars, and
every dollar burning a hole; and Slavin and his gang will get most
of it.  But,' he added, 'you must have breakfast.  You'll find a
tub in the kitchen; don't be afraid to splash.  It is the best I
have to offer you.'

The tub sounded inviting, and before many minutes had passed I was
in a delightful glow, the effect of cold water and a rough towel,
and that consciousness of virtue that comes to a man who has had
courage to face his cold bath on a winter morning.

The breakfast was laid with fine taste.  A diminutive pine-tree, in
a pot hung round with wintergreen, stood in the centre of the
table.

'Well, now, this looks good; porridge, beefsteak, potatoes, toast,
and marmalade.'

'I hope you will enjoy it all.'

There was not much talk over our meal.  Mr. Craig was evidently
preoccupied, and as blue as his politeness would allow him.
Slavin's victory weighed upon his spirits.  Finally he burst out,
'Look here!  I can't, I won't stand it; something must be done.
Last Christmas this town was for two weeks, as one of the miners
said, "a little suburb of hell."  It was something too awful.  And
at the end of it all one young fellow was found dead in his shack,
and twenty or more crawled back to the camps, leaving their three
months' pay with Slavin and his suckers.

'I won't stand it, I say.'  He turned fiercely on me.  'What's to
be done?'

This rather took me aback, for I had troubled myself with nothing
of this sort in my life before, being fully occupied in keeping
myself out of difficulty, and allowing others the same privilege.
So I ventured the consolation that he had done his part, and that a
spree more or less would not make much difference to these men.
But the next moment I wished I had been slower in speech, for he
swiftly faced me, and his words came like a torrent.

'God forgive you that heartless word!  Do you know--?  But no; you
don't know what you are saying.  You don't know that these men have
been clambering for dear life out of a fearful pit for three months
past, and doing good climbing too, poor chaps.  You don't think
that some of them have wives, most of them mothers and sisters, in
the east or across the sea, for whose sake they are slaving here;
the miners hoping to save enough to bring their families to this
homeless place, the rest to make enough to go back with credit.
Why, there's Nixon, miner, splendid chap; has been here for two
years, and drawing the highest pay.  Twice he has been in sight of
his heaven, for he can't speak of his wife and babies without
breaking up, and twice that slick son of the devil--that's
Scripture, mind you--Slavin, got him, and "rolled" him, as the boys
say.  He went back to the mines broken in body and in heart.  He
says this is his third and last chance.  If Slavin gets him, his
wife and babies will never see him on earth or in heaven.  There is
Sandy, too, and the rest.  And,' he added, in a lower tone, and
with the curious little thrill of pathos in his voice, 'this is the
day the Saviour came to the world.'  He paused, and then with a
little sad smile, 'But I don't want to abuse you.'

'Do, I enjoy it, I'm a beast, a selfish beast'; for somehow his
intense, blazing earnestness made me feel uncomfortably small.

'What have we to offer?' I demanded.

'Wait till I have got these things cleared away, and my
housekeeping done.'

I pressed my services upon him, somewhat feebly, I own, for I can't
bear dishwater; but he rejected my offer.

'I don't like trusting my china to the hands of a tender-foot.'

'Quite right, though your china would prove an excellent means of
defence at long range.'  It was delf, a quarter of an inch thick.
So I smoked while he washed up, swept, dusted, and arranged the
room.

After the room was ordered to his taste, we proceeded to hold
council.  He could offer dinner, magic lantern, music.  'We can
fill in time for two hours, but,' he added gloomily, 'we can't beat
the dance and the "High Kickers."'

'Have you nothing new or startling?'

He shook his head.

'No kind of show?  Dog show?  Snake charmer?'

'Slavin has a monopoly of the snakes.'

Then he added hesitatingly, 'There was an old Punch-and-Judy chap
here last year, but he died.  Whisky again.'

'What happened to his show?'

'The Black Rock Hotel man took it for board and whisky bill.  He
has it still, I suppose.'

I did not much relish the business; but I hated to see him beaten,
so I ventured, 'I have run a Punch and Judy in an amateur way at
the 'Varsity.'

He sprang to his feet with a yell.

'You have! you mean to say it?  We've got them!  We've beaten
them!'  He had an extraordinary way of taking your help for
granted.  'The miner chaps, mostly English and Welsh, went mad over
the poor old showman, and made him so wealthy that in sheer
gratitude he drank himself to death.'

He walked up and down in high excitement and in such evident
delight that I felt pledged to my best effort.

'Well,' I said, 'first the poster.  We must beat them in that.'

He brought me large sheets of brown paper, and after two hours'
hard work I had half a dozen pictorial showbills done in gorgeous
colours and striking designs.  They were good, if I do say it
myself.

The turkey, the magic lantern, the Punch and Judy show were all
there, the last with a crowd before it in gaping delight.  A few
explanatory words were thrown in, emphasising the highly artistic
nature of the Punch and Judy entertainment.

Craig was delighted, and proceeded to perfect his plans.  He had
some half a dozen young men, four young ladies, and eight or ten
matrons, upon whom he could depend for help.  These he organised
into a vigilance committee charged with the duty of preventing
miners and lumbermen from getting away to Slavin's.  'The critical
moments will be immediately before and after dinner, and then again
after the show is over,' he explained.  'The first two crises must
be left to the care of Punch and Judy, and as for the last, I am
not yet sure what shall be done'; but I saw he had something in his
head, for he added, 'I shall see Mrs. Mavor.'

'Who is Mrs. Mavor?' I asked.  But he made no reply.  He was a born
fighter, and he put the fighting spirit into us all.  We were bound
to win.

The sports were to begin at two o'clock.  By lunch-time everything
was in readiness.  After lunch I was having a quiet smoke in
Craig's shack when in he rushed, saying--

'The battle will be lost before it is fought.  If we lose Quatre
Bras, we shall never get to Waterloo.'

'What's up?'

'Slavin, just now.  The miners are coming in, and he will have them
in tow in half an hour.'

He looked at me appealingly.  I knew what he wanted.

'All right; I suppose I must, but it is an awful bore that a man
can't have a quiet smoke.'

'You're not half a bad fellow,' he replied, smiling.  'I shall get
the ladies to furnish coffee inside the booth.  You furnish them
intellectual nourishment in front with dear old Punch and Judy.'

He sent a boy with a bell round the village announcing, 'Punch, and
Judy in front of the Christmas booth beside the church'; and for
three-quarters of an hour I shrieked and sweated in that awful
little pen.  But it was almost worth it to hear the shouts of
approval and laughter that greeted my performance.  It was cold
work standing about, so that the crowd was quite ready to respond
when Punch, after being duly hanged, came forward and invited all
into the booth for the hot coffee which Judy had ordered.

In they trooped, and Quatre Bras was won.

No sooner were the miners safely engaged with their coffee than I
heard a great noise of bells and of men shouting; and on reaching
the street I saw that the men from the lumber camp were coming in.
Two immense sleighs, decorated with ribbons and spruce boughs, each
drawn by a four-horse team gaily adorned, filled with some fifty
men, singing and shouting with all their might, were coming down
the hill road at full gallop.  Round the corner they swung, dashed
at full speed across the bridge and down the street, and pulled up
after they had made the circuit of a block, to the great admiration
of the onlookers.  Among others Slavin sauntered up good-naturedly,
making himself agreeable to Sandy and those who were helping to
unhitch his team.

'Oh, you need not take trouble with me or my team, Mike Slavin.
Batchees and me and the boys can look after them fine,' said Sandy
coolly.

This rejecting of hospitality was perfectly understood by Slavin
and by all.

'Dat's too bad, heh?' said Baptiste wickedly; 'and, Sandy, he's got
good money on his pocket for sure, too.'  The boys laughed, and
Slavin, joining in, turned away with Keele and Blaney; but by the
look in his eye I knew he was playing 'Br'er Rabbit,' and lying
low.

Mr. Craig just then came up, 'Hello, boys! too late for Punch and
Judy, but just in time for hot coffee and doughnuts.'

'Bon; dat's fuss rate,' said Baptiste heartily; 'where you keep
him?'

'Up in the tent next the church there.  The miners are all in.'

'Ah, dat so?  Dat's bad news for the shantymen, heh, Sandy?' said
the little Frenchman dolefully.

'There was a clothes-basket full of doughnuts and a boiler of
coffee left as I passed just now,' said Craig encouragingly.

'Allons, mes garcons; vite! never say keel!' cried Baptiste
excitedly, stripping off the harness.

But Sandy would not leave the horses till they were carefully
rubbed down, blanketed, and fed, for he was entered for the four-
horse race and it behoved him to do his best to win.  Besides, he
scorned to hurry himself for anything so unimportant as eating;
that he considered hardly worthy even of Baptiste.  Mr. Craig
managed to get a word with him before he went off, and I saw Sandy
solemnly and emphatically shake his head, saying, 'Ah! we'll beat
him this day,' and I gathered that he was added to the vigilance
committee.

Old man Nelson was busy with his own team.  He turned slowly at Mr.
Craig's greeting, 'How is it, Nelson?' and it was with a very grave
voice he answered, 'I hardly know, sir; but I am not gone yet,
though it seems little to hold to.'

'All you want for a grip is what your hand can cover.  What would
you have?  And besides, do you know why you are not gone yet?'

The old man waited, looking at the minister gravely.

'Because He hasn't let go His grip of you.'

'How do you know He's gripped me?'

'Now, look here, Nelson, do you want to quit this thing and give it
all up?'

'No, no!  For heaven's sake, no!  Why, do you think I have lost
it?' said Nelson, almost piteously.

'Well, He's keener about it than you; and I'll bet you haven't
thought it worth while to thank Him.'

'To thank Him,' he repeated, almost stupidly, 'for--'

'For keeping you where you are overnight,' said Mr. Craig, almost
sternly.

The old man gazed at the minister, a light growing in his eyes.

'You're right.  Thank God, you're right.'  And then he turned
quickly away, and went into the stable behind his team.  It was a
minute before he came out.  Over his face there was a trembling
joy.

'Can I do anything for you to-day?' he asked humbly.

'Indeed you just can,' said the minister, taking his hand and
shaking it very warmly; and then he told him Slavin's programme and
ours.

'Sandy is all right till after his race.  After that is his time of
danger,' said the minister.

'I'll stay with him, sir,' said old Nelson, in the tone of a man
taking a covenant, and immediately set off for the coffee-tent.

'Here comes another recruit for your corps,' I said, pointing to
Leslie Graeme, who was coming down the street at that moment in his
light sleigh.

'I am not so sure.  Do you think you could get him?'

I laughed.  'You are a good one.'

'Well,' he replied, half defiantly, 'is not this your fight too?'

'You make me think so, though I am bound to say I hardly recognise
myself to day.  But here goes,' and before I knew it I was
describing our plans to Graeme, growing more and more enthusiastic
as he sat in his sleigh, listening with a quizzical smile I didn't
quite like.

'He's got you too,' he said; 'I feared so.'

'Well,' I laughed, 'perhaps so.  But I want to lick that man
Slavin.  I've just seen him, and he's just what Craig calls him, "a
slick son of the devil."  Don't be shocked; he says it is
Scripture.'

'Revised version,' said Graeme gravely, while Craig looked a little
abashed.

'What is assigned me, Mr. Craig? for I know that this man is simply
your agent.'

I repudiated the idea, while Mr. Craig said nothing.

'What's my part?' demanded Graeme.

'Well,' said Mr. Craig hesitatingly, 'of course I would do nothing
till I had consulted you; but I want a man to take my place at the
sports.  I am referee.'

'That's all right,' said Graeme, with an air of relief; 'I expected
something hard.'

'And then I thought you would not mind presiding at dinner--I want
it to go off well.'

'Did you notice that?' said Graeme to me.  'Not a bad touch, eh?'

'That's nothing to the way he touched me.  Wait and learn,' I
answered, while Craig looked quite distressed.  'He'll do it, Mr.
Craig, never fear,' I said, 'and any other little duty that may
occur to you.'

'Now that's too bad of you.  That is all I want, honour bright,' he
replied; adding, as he turned away, 'you are just in time for a cup
of coffee, Mr. Graeme.  Now I must see Mrs. Mavor.'

'Who is Mrs. Mavor?' I demanded of Graeme.

'Mrs. Mavor?  The miners' guardian angel.'

We put up the horses and set off for coffee.  As we approached the
booth Graeme caught sight of the Punch and Judy show, stood still
in amazement, and exclaimed, 'Can the dead live?'

'Punch and Judy never die,' I replied solemnly.

'But the old manipulator is dead enough, poor old beggar!'

'But he left his mantle, as you see.'

He looked at me a moment

'What! do you mean, you--?'

'Yes, that is exactly what I do mean.'

'He is great man, that Craig fellow--a truly great man.'

And then he leaned up against a tree and laughed till the tears
came.  'I say, old boy, don't mind me,' he gasped, 'but do you
remember the old 'Varsity show?'

'Yes, you villain; and I remember your part in it.  I wonder how
you can, even at this remote date, laugh at it.'  For I had a vivid
recollection of how, after a 'chaste and highly artistic
performance of this mediaeval play' had been given before a
distinguished Toronto audience, the trap door by which I had
entered my box was fastened, and I was left to swelter in my cage,
and forced to listen to the suffocated laughter from the wings and
the stage whispers of 'Hello, Mr. Punch, where's the baby?'  And
for many a day after I was subjected to anxious inquiries as to the
locality and health of 'the baby,' and whether it was able to be
out.

'Oh, the dear old days!' he kept saying, over and over, in a tone
so full of sadness that my heart grew sore for him and I forgave
him, as many a time before.

The sports passed off in typical Western style.  In addition to the
usual running and leaping contests, there was rifle and pistol
shooting, in both of which old man Nelson stood first, with Shaw,
foreman of the mines, second.

The great event of the day, however, was to be the four-horse race,
for which three teams were entered--one from the mines driven by
Nixon, Craig's friend, a citizens' team, and Sandy's.  The race was
really between the miners' team, and that from the woods, for the
citizens' team, though made up of speedy horses, had not been
driven much together, and knew neither their driver nor each other.
In the miners' team were four bays, very powerful, a trifle heavy
perhaps, but well matched, perfectly trained, and perfectly handled
by their driver.  Sandy had his long rangy roans, and for leaders a
pair of half-broken pinto bronchos.  The pintos, caught the summer
before upon the Alberta prairies, were fleet as deer, but wicked
and uncertain.  They were Baptiste's special care and pride.  If
they would only run straight there was little doubt that they would
carry the roans and themselves to glory; but one could not tell the
moment they might bolt or kick things to pieces.

Being the only non-partisan in the crowd I was asked to referee.
The race was about half a mile and return, the first and last
quarters being upon the ice.  The course, after leaving the ice,
led up from the river by a long easy slope to the level above; and
at the further end curved somewhat sharply round the Old Fort.  The
only condition attaching to the race was that the teams should
start from the scratch, make the turn of the Fort, and finish at
the scratch.  There were no vexing regulations as to fouls.  The
man making the foul would find it necessary to reckon with the
crowd, which was considered sufficient guarantee for a fair and
square race.  Owing to the hazards of the course, the result would
depend upon the skill of the drivers quite as much as upon the
speed of the teams.  The points of hazard were at the turn round
the Old Fort, and at a little ravine which led down to the river,
over which the road passed by means of a long log bridge or
causeway.

From a point upon the high bank of the river the whole course lay
in open view.  It was a scene full of life and vividly picturesque.
There were miners in dark clothes and peak caps; citizens in
ordinary garb; ranchmen in wide cowboy hats and buckskin shirts and
leggings, some with cartridge-belts and pistols; a few half-breeds
and Indians in half-native, half-civilised dress; and scattering
through the crowd the lumbermen with gay scarlet and blue blanket
coats, and some with knitted tuques of the same colours.  A very
good-natured but extremely uncertain crowd it was.  At the head of
each horse stood a man, but at the pintos' heads Baptiste stood
alone, trying to hold down the off leader, thrown into a frenzy of
fear by the yelling of the crowd.

Gradually all became quiet, till, in the midst of absolute
stillness, came the words, 'Are you ready?', then the pistol-shot
and the great race had begun.  Above the roar of the crowd came the
shrill cry of Baptiste, as he struck his broncho with the palm of
his hand, and swung himself into the sleigh beside Sandy, as it
shot past.

Like a flash the bronchos sprang to the front, two lengths before
the other teams; but, terrified by the yelling of the crowd,
instead of bending to the left bank up which the road wound, they
wheeled to the right and were almost across the river before Sandy
could swing them back into the course.

Baptiste's cries, a curious mixture of French and English,
continued to strike through all other sounds till they gained the
top of the slope to find the others almost a hundred yards in
front, the citizens' team leading, with the miners' following
close.  The moment the pintos caught sight of the teams before them
they set off at a terrific pace and steadily devoured the
intervening space.  Nearer and nearer the turn came, the eight
horses in front, running straight and well within their speed.
After them flew the pintos, running savagely with ears set back,
leading well the big roans, thundering along and gaining at every
bound.  And now the citizens' team had almost reached the Fort,
running hard, and drawing away from the bays.  But Nixon knew what
he was about, and was simply steadying his team for the turn.  The
event proved his wisdom, for in the turn the leading team left the
track, lost a moment or two in the deep snow, and before they could
regain the road the bays had swept superbly past, leaving their
rivals to follow in the rear.  On came the pintos, swiftly nearing
the Fort.  Surely at that pace they cannot make the turn.  But
Sandy knows his leaders.  They have their eyes upon the teams in
front, and need no touch of rein.  Without the slightest change in
speed the nimble-footed bronchos round the turn, hauling the big
roans after them, and fall in behind the citizens' team, which is
regaining steadily the ground lost in the turn.

And now the struggle is for the bridge over the ravine.  The bays
in front, running with mouths wide open, are evidently doing their
best; behind them, and every moment nearing them, but at the limit
of their speed too, come the lighter and fleeter citizens' team;
while opposite their driver are the pintos, pulling hard, eager and
fresh.  Their temper is too uncertain to send them to the front;
they run well following, but when leading cannot be trusted, and
besides, a broncho hates a bridge; so Sandy holds them where they
are, waiting and hoping for his chance after the bridge is crossed.
Foot by foot the citizens' team creep up upon the flank of the
bays, with the pintos in turn hugging them closely, till it seems
as if the three, if none slackens, must strike the bridge together;
and this will mean destruction to one at least.  This danger Sandy
perceives, but he dare not check his leaders.  Suddenly, within a
few yards of the bridge, Baptiste throws himself upon the lines,
wrenches them out of Sandy's hands, and, with a quick swing, faces
the pintos down the steep side of the ravine, which is almost sheer
ice with a thin coat of snow.  It is a daring course to take, for
the ravine, though not deep, is full of undergrowth, and is
partially closed up by a brush heap at the further end.  But, with
a yell, Baptiste hurls his four horses down the slope, and into the
undergrowth.  'Allons, mes enfants!  Courage! vite, vite!' cries
their driver, and nobly do the pintos respond.  Regardless of
bushes and brush heaps, they tear their way through; but, as they
emerge, the hind bob-sleigh catches a root, and, with a crash, the
sleigh is hurled high in the air.  Baptiste's cries ring out high
and shrill as ever, encouraging his team, and never cease till,
with a plunge and a scramble, they clear the brush heap lying at
the mouth of the ravine, and are out on the ice on the river, with
Baptiste standing on the front bob, the box trailing behind, and
Sandy nowhere to be seen.

Three hundred yards of the course remain.  The bays, perfectly
handled, have gained at the bridge and in the descent to the ice,
and are leading the citizens' team by half a dozen sleigh lengths.
Behind both comes Baptiste.  It is now or never for the pintos.
The rattle of the trailing box, together with the wild yelling of
the crowd rushing down the bank, excites the bronchos to madness,
and, taking the bits in their teeth, they do their first free
running that day.  Past the citizens' team like a whirlwind they
dash, clear the intervening space, and gain the flanks of the bays.
Can the bays hold them?  Over them leans their driver, plying for
the first time the hissing lash.  Only fifty yards more.  The
miners begin to yell.  But Baptiste, waving his lines high in one
hand seizes his tuque with the other, whirls it about his head and
flings it with a fiercer yell than ever at the bronchos.  Like the
bursting of a hurricane the pintos leap forward, and with a
splendid rush cross the scratch, winners by their own length.

There was a wild quarter of an hour.  The shantymen had torn off
their coats and were waving them wildly and tossing them high,
while the ranchers added to the uproar by emptying their revolvers
into the air in a way that made one nervous.

When the crowd was somewhat quieted Sandy's stiff figure appeared,
slowly making towards them.  A dozen lumbermen ran to him, eagerly
inquiring if he were hurt.  But Sandy could only curse the little
Frenchman for losing the race.

'Lost!  Why, man, we've won it!' shouted a voice, at which Sandy's
rage vanished, and he allowed himself to be carried in upon the
shoulders of his admirers.

'Where's the lad?' was his first question.

The bronchos are off with him.  He's down at the rapids like
enough.'

'Let me go,' shouted Sandy, setting off at a run in the track of
the sleigh.  He had not gone far before he met Baptiste coming back
with his team foaming, the roans going quietly, but the bronchos
dancing, and eager to be at it again.

'Voila! bully boy! tank the bon Dieu, Sandy; you not keel, heh?
Ah! you are one grand chevalier,' exclaimed Baptiste, hauling Sandy
in and thrusting the lines into his hands.  And so they came back,
the sleigh box still dragging behind, the pintos executing
fantastic figures on their hind legs, and Sandy holding them down.
The little Frenchman struck a dramatic attitude and called out--

'Voila!  What's the matter wiz Sandy, heh?'

The roar that answered set the bronchos off again plunging and
kicking, and only when Baptiste got them by the heads could they be
induced to stand long enough to allow Sandy to be proclaimed winner
of the race.  Several of the lumbermen sprang into the sleigh box
with Sandy and Baptiste, among them Keefe, followed by Nelson, and
the first part of the great day was over.  Slavin could not
understand the new order of things.  That a great event like the
four-horse race should not be followed by 'drinks all round' was to
him at once disgusting and incomprehensible; and, realising his
defeat for the moment, he fell into the crowd and disappeared.  But
he left behind him his 'runners.'  He had not yet thrown up the
game.

Mr. Craig meantime came to me, and, looking anxiously after Sandy
in his sleigh, with his frantic crowd of yelling admirers, said in
a gloomy voice, 'Poor Sandy!  He is easily caught, and Keefe has
the devil's cunning.'

'He won't touch Slavin's whisky to-day,' I answered confidently.

'There'll be twenty bottles waiting him in the stable,' he replied
bitterly, 'and I can't go following him up.'

'He won't stand that, no man would.  God help us all.'  I could
hardly recognise myself, for I found in my heart an earnest echo to
that prayer as I watched him go toward the crowd again, his face
set in strong determination.  He looked like the captain of a
forlorn hope, and I was proud to be following him.


CHAPTER III

WATERLOO.  OUR FIGHT--HIS VICTORY


The sports were over, and there remained still an hour to be filled
in before dinner.  It was an hour full of danger to Craig's hopes
of victory, for the men were wild with excitement, and ready for
the most reckless means of 'slinging their dust.'  I could not but
admire the skill with which Mr. Craig caught their attention.

'Gentlemen,' he called out, 'we've forgotten the judge of the great
race.  Three cheers for Mr. Connor!'

Two of the shantymen picked me up and hoisted me on their shoulders
while the cheers were given.

'Announce the Punch and Judy,' he entreated me, in a low voice.  I
did so in a little speech, and was forthwith borne aloft, through
the street to the booth, followed by the whole crowd, cheering like
mad.

The excitement of the crowd caught me, and for an hour I squeaked
and worked the wires of the immortal and unhappy family in a manner
hitherto unapproached by me at least.  I was glad enough when
Graeme came to tell me to send the men in to dinner.  This Mr.
Punch did in the most gracious manner, and again with cheers for
Punch's master they trooped tumultuously into the tent.

We had only well begun when Baptiste came in quietly but hurriedly
and whispered to me--

'M'sieu Craig, he's gone to Slavin's, and would lak you and M'sieu
Graeme would follow queek.  Sandy he's take one leel drink up at de
stable, and he's go mad lak one diable.'

I sent him for Graeme, who was presiding at dinner, and set off for
Slavin's at a run.  There I found Mr. Craig and Nelson holding
Sandy, more than half drunk, back from Slavin, who, stripped to the
shirt, was coolly waiting with a taunting smile.

'Let me go, Mr. Craig,' Sandy was saying, 'I am a good Presbyterian.
He is a Papist thief; and he has my money; and I will have it out
of the soul of him.'

'Let him go, preacher,' sneered Slavin, 'I'll cool him off for yez.
But ye'd better hold him if yez wants his mug left on to him.'

'Let him go!' Keefe was shouting.

'Hands off!' Blaney was echoing.

I pushed my way in.  'What's up?' I cried.

'Mr. Connor,' said Sandy solemnly, 'it is a gentleman you are,
though your name is against you, and I am a good Presbyterian,
and I can give you the Commandments and Reasons annexed to them;
but yon's a thief, a Papist thief, and I am justified in getting my
money out of his soul.'

'But,' I remonstrated, 'you won't get it in this way.'

'He has my money,' reiterated Sandy.

'He is a blank liar, and he's afraid to take it up,' said Slavin,
in a low, cool tone.

With a roar Sandy broke away and rushed at him; but, without moving
from his tracks, Slavin met him with a straight left-hander and
laid him flat.

'Hooray,' yelled Blaney, 'Ireland for ever!' and, seizing the iron
poker, swung it around his head, crying, 'Back, or, by the holy
Moses, I'll kill the first man that interferes wid the game.'

'Give it to him!' Keefe said savagely.

Sandy rose slowly, gazing round stupidly.

'He don't know what hit him,' laughed Keefe.

This roused the Highlander, and saying, 'I'll settle you afterwards,
Mister Keefe,' he rushed in again at Slavin.  Again Slavin met him
again with his left, staggered him, and, before he fell, took a step
forward and delivered a terrific right-hand blow on his jaw.  Poor
Sandy went down in a heap amid the yells of Blaney, Keefe, and some
others of the gang.  I was in despair when in came Baptiste and
Graeme.

One look at Sandy, and Baptiste tore off his coat and cap,
slammed them on the floor, danced on them, and with a long-drawn
'sap-r-r-r-rie,' rushed at Slavin.  But Graeme caught him by the
back of the neck, saying, 'Hold on, little man,' and turning to
Slavin, pointed to Sandy, who was reviving under Nelson's care,
and said, 'What's this for?'

'Ask him,' said Slavin insolently.  'He knows.'

'What is it, Nelson?'

Nelson explained that Sandy, after drinking some at the stable and
a glass at the Black Rock Hotel, had come down here with Keefe and
the others, had lost his money, and was accusing Slavin of robbing
him.

'Did you furnish him with liquor?' said Graeme sternly.

'It is none of your business,' replied Slavin, with an oath.

'I shall make it my business.  It is not the first time my men have
lost money in this saloon.'

'You lie,' said Slavin, with deliberate emphasis.

'Slavin,' said Graeme quietly, 'it's a pity you said that, because,
unless you apologise in one minute, I shall make you sorry.'

'Apologise?' roared Slavin, 'apologise to you?' calling him a vile
name.

Graeme grew white, and said even more slowly, 'Now you'll have to
take it; no apology will do.'

He slowly stripped off coat and vest.  Mr. Craig interposed,
begging Graeme to let the matter pass.  'Surely he is not worth
it.'

'Mr. Craig,' said Graeme, with an easy smile, 'you don't
understand.  No man can call me that name and walk around
afterwards feeling well.'

Then, turning to Slavin, he said, 'Now, if you want a minute's
rest, I can wait.'

Slavin, with a curse, bade him come.

'Blaney,' said Graeme sharply, 'you get back.'  Blaney promptly
stepped back to Keefe's side.  'Nelson, you and Baptiste can see
that they stay there.'  The old man nodded and looked at Craig, who
simply said, 'Do the best you can.'

It was a good fight.  Slavin had plenty of pluck, and for a time
forced the fighting, Graeme guarding easily and tapping him
aggravatingly about the nose and eyes, drawing blood, but not
disabling him.  Gradually there came a look of fear into Slavin's
eyes, and the beads stood upon his face.  He had met his master.

'Now, Slavin, you're beginning to be sorry; and now I am going to
show you what you are made of.'  Graeme made one or two lightning
passes, struck Slavin one, two, three terrific blows, and laid him
quite flat and senseless.  Keefe and Blaney both sprang forward,
but there was a savage kind of growl.

'Hold, there!'  It was old man Nelson looking along a pistol
barrel.  'You know me, Keefe,' he said.  'You won't do any murder
this time.'

Keefe turned green and yellow, and staggered back, while Slavin
slowly rose to his feet.

'Will you take some more?' said Graeme.  'You haven't got much; but
mind I have stopped playing with you.  Put up your gun, Nelson.  No
one will interfere now.'

Slavin hesitated, then rushed, but Graeme stepped to meet him, and
we saw Slavin's heels in the air as he fell back upon his neck and
shoulders and lay still, with his toes quivering.

'Bon!' yelled Baptiste.  'Bully boy!  Dat's de bon stuff.  Dat's
larn him one good lesson.'  But immediately he shrieked,
Gar-r-r-r-e a vous!'

He was too late, for there was a crash of breaking glass, and
Graeme fell to the floor with a long deep cut on the side of his
head.  Keefe had hurled a bottle with all too sure an aim, and had
fled.  I thought he was dead; but we carried him out, and in a few
minutes he groaned, opened his eyes, and sank again into
insensibility.

'Where can we take him?' I cried.

'To my shack,' said Mr. Craig.

'Is there no place nearer?'

'Yes; Mrs. Mavor's.  I shall run on to tell her.'

She met us at the door.  I had in mind to say some words of
apology, but when I looked upon her face I forgot my words, forgot
my business at her door, and stood simply looking.

'Come in!  Bring him in!  Please do not wait,' she said, and her
voice was sweet and soft and firm.

We laid him in a large room at the back of the shop over which Mrs.
Mavor lived.  Together we dressed the wound, her firm white
fingers, skilful as if with long training.  Before the dressing was
finished I sent Craig off, for the time had come for the Magic
Lantern in the church, and I knew how critical the moment was in
our fight.  'Go,' I said; 'he is coming to, and we do not need
you.'

In a few moments more Graeme revived, and, gazing about, asked,
'What's, all this about?' and then, recollecting, 'Ah! that brute
Keefe'; then seeing my anxious face he said carelessly, 'Awful
bore, ain't it?  Sorry to trouble you, old fellow.'

'You be hanged!' I said shortly; for his old sweet smile was
playing about his lips, and was almost too much for me.  'Mrs.
Mavor and I are in command, and you must keep perfectly still.'

'Mrs. Mavor?' he said, in surprise.  She came forward, with a
slight flush on her face.

'I think you know me, Mr. Graeme.'

'I have often seen you, and wished to know you.  I am sorry to
bring you this trouble.'

'You must not say so,' she replied, 'but let me do all for you that
I can.  And now the doctor says you are to lie still.'

'The doctor?  Oh! you mean Connor.  He is hardly there yet.  You
don't know each other.  Permit me to present Mr. Connor, Mrs.
Mavor.'

As she bowed slightly, her eyes looked into mine with serious gaze,
not inquiring, yet searching my soul.  As I looked into her eyes I
forgot everything about me, and when I recalled myself it seemed as
if I had been away in some far place.  It was not their colour or
their brightness; I do not yet know their colour, and I have often
looked into them; and they were not bright; but they were clear,
and one could look far down into them, and in their depths see a
glowing, steady light.  As I went to get some drugs from the Black
Rock doctor, I found myself wondering about that far-down light;
and about her voice, how it could get that sound from far away.

I found the doctor quite drunk, as indeed Mr. Craig had warned; but
his drugs were good, and I got what I wanted and quickly returned.

While Graeme slept Mrs. Mavor made me tea.  As the evening wore on
I told her the events of the day, dwelling admiringly upon Craig's
generalship.  She smiled at this.

'He got me too,' she said.  'Nixon was sent to me just before the
sports; and I don't think he will break down to-day, and I am so
thankful.'  And her eyes glowed.

'I am quite sure he won't,' I thought to myself, but I said no
word.

After a long pause, she went on, 'I have promised Mr. Craig to sing
to-night, if I am needed!' and then, after a moment's hesitation,
'It is two years since I have been able to sing--two years,' she
repeated, 'since'--and then her brave voice trembled--'my husband
was killed.'

'I quite understand,' I said, having no other word on my tongue

'And,' she went on quietly, 'I fear I have been selfish.  It is
hard to sing the same songs.  We were very happy.  But the miners
like to hear me sing, and I think perhaps it helps them to feel
less lonely, and keeps them from evil.  I shall try to-night, if I
am needed.  Mr. Craig will not ask me unless he must.'

I would have seen every miner and lumberman in the place hideously
drunk before I would have asked her to sing one song while her
heart ached.  I wondered at Craig, and said, rather angrily--

'He thinks only of those wretched miners and shantymen of his.'

She looked at me with wonder in her eyes, and said gently, 'And are
they not Christ's too?'

And I found no word to reply.

It was nearing ten o'clock, and I was wondering how the fight was
going, and hoping that Mrs. Mavor would not be needed, when the
door opened, and old man Nelson and Sandy, the latter much battered
and ashamed, came in with the word for Mrs. Mavor.

'I will come,' she said simply.  She saw me preparing to accompany
her, and asked, 'Do you think you can leave him?'

'He will do quite well in Nelson's care.'

'Then I am glad; for I must take my little one with me.  I did not
put her to bed in case I should need to go, and I may not leave
her.'

We entered the church by the back door, and saw at once that even
yet the battle might easily be lost.

Some miners had just come from Slavin's, evidently bent on breaking
up the meeting, in revenge for the collapse of the dance, which
Slavin was unable to enjoy, much less direct.  Craig was gallantly
holding his ground, finding it hard work to keep his men in good
humour, and so prevent a fight, for there were cries of 'Put him
out!  Put the beast out!' at a miner half drunk and wholly
outrageous.

The look of relief that came over his face when Craig caught sight
of us told how anxious he had been, and reconciled me to Mrs.
Mavor's singing.  'Thank the good God,' he said, with what came
near being a sob, 'I was about to despair.'

He immediately walked to the front and called out--

'Gentlemen, if you wish it, Mrs. Mavor will sing.'

There was a dead silence.  Some one began to applaud, but a miner
said savagely, 'Stop that, you fool!'

There was a few moments' delay, when from the crowd a voice called
out, 'Does Mrs. Mavor wish to sing?' followed by cries of 'Ay,
that's it.'  Then Shaw, the foreman at the mines, stood up in the
audience and said--

'Mr. Craig and gentlemen, you know that three years ago I was known
as "Old Ricketts," and that I owe all I am to-night, under God, to
Mrs. Mavor, and'--with a little quiver in his voice--'her baby.
And we all know that for two years she has not sung; and we all
know why.  And what I say is, that if she does not feel like
singing to-night, she is not going to sing to keep any drunken
brute of Slavin's crowd quiet.'

There were deep growls of approval all over the church.  I could
have hugged Shaw then and there.  Mr. Craig went to Mrs. Mavor, and
after a word with her came back and said--

'Mrs. Mavor, wishes me to thank her dear friend Mr. Shaw, but says
she would like to sing.'

The response was perfect stillness.  Mr. Craig sat down to the
organ and played the opening bars of the touching melody, 'Oft in
the Stilly Night.'  Mrs. Mavor came to the front, and, with a smile
of exquisite sweetness upon her sad face, and looking straight at
us with her glorious eyes, began to sing.

Her voice, a rich soprano, even and true, rose and fell, now soft,
now strong, but always filling the building, pouring around us
floods of music.  I had heard Patti's 'Home, sweet Home,' and of
all singing that alone affected me as did this.

At the end of the first verse the few women in the church and some
men were weeping quietly; but when she began the words--


     'When I remember all
      The friends once linked together,'


sobs came on every side from these tender-hearted fellows, and Shaw
quite lost his grip.  But she sang steadily on, the tone clearer
and sweeter and fuller at every note, and when the sound of her
voice died away, she stood looking at the men as if in wonder that
they should weep.  No one moved.  Mr. Craig played softly on, and,
wandering through many variations, arrived at last at


     'Jesus, lover of my soul.'


As she sang the appealing words, her face was lifted up, and she
saw none of us; but she must have seen some one, for the cry in her
voice could only come from one who could see and feel help close at
hand.  On and on went the glorious voice, searching my soul's
depths; but when she came to the words--


     'Thou, O Christ, art all I want,'


she stretched up her arms--she had quite forgotten us, her voice
had borne her to other worlds--and sang with such a passion of
'abandon' that my soul was ready to surrender anything, everything.

Again Mr. Craig wandered on through his changing chords till again
he came to familiar ground, and the voice began, in low, thrilling
tones, Bernard's great song of home--


     'Jerusalem the golden.'


Every word, with all its weight of meaning, came winging to our
souls, till we found ourselves gazing afar into those stately halls
of Zion, with their daylight serene and their jubilant throngs.
When the singer came to the last verse there was a pause.  Again
Mr. Craig softly played the interlude, but still there was no
voice.  I looked up.  She was very white, and her eyes were glowing
with their deep light.  Mr. Craig looked quickly about, saw her,
stopped, and half rose, as if to go to her, when, in a voice that
seemed to come from a far-off land, she went on--


     'O sweet and blessed country!'


The longing, the yearning, in the second 'O' were indescribable.
Again and again, as she held that word, and then dropped down with
the cadence in the music, my heart ached for I knew not what.

The audience were sitting as in a trance.  The grimy faces of the
miners, for they never get quite white, were furrowed with the
tear-courses.  Shaw, by this time, had his face too lifted high,
his eyes gazing far above the singer's head, and I knew by the
rapture in his face that he was seeing, as she saw, the thronging
stately halls and the white-robed conquerors.  He had felt, and was
still feeling, all the stress of the fight, and to him the vision
of the conquerors in their glory was soul-drawing and soul-
stirring.  And Nixon, too--he had his vision; but what he saw was
the face of the singer, with the shining eyes, and, by the look of
him, that was vision enough.

Immediately after her last note Mrs. Mavor stretched out her hands
to her little girl, who was sitting on my knee, caught her up, and,
holding her close to her breast, walked quickly behind the curtain.
Not a sound followed the singing: no one moved till she had
disappeared; and then Mr. Craig came to the front, and, motioning
to me to follow Mrs. Mavor, began in a low, distinct voice--

'Gentlemen, it was not easy for Mrs. Mavor to sing for us, and you
know she sang because she is a miner's wife, and her heart is with
the miners.  But she sang, too, because her heart is His who came
to earth this day so many years ago to save us all; and she would
make you love Him too.  For in loving Him you are saved from all
base loves, and you know what I mean.

'And before we say good-night, men, I want to know if the time is
not come when all of you who mean to be better than you are should
join in putting from us this thing that has brought sorrow and
shame to us and to those we love?  You know what I mean.  Some of
you are strong; will you stand by and see weaker men robbed of the
money they save for those far away, and robbed of the manhood that
no money can buy or restore?

'Will the strong men help?  Shall we all join hands in this?  What
do you say?  In this town we have often seen hell, and just a
moment ago we were all looking into heaven, "the sweet and blessed
country."  O men!' and his voice rang in an agony through the
building--'O men! which shall be ours?  For Heaven's dear sake, let
us help one another!  Who will?'

I was looking out through a slit in the curtain.  The men, already
wrought to intense feeling by the music, were listening with set
faces and gleaming eyes, and as at the appeal 'Who will?' Craig
raised high his hand, Shaw, Nixon, and a hundred men sprang to
their feet and held high their hands.

I have witnessed some thrilling scenes in my life, but never
anything to equal that: the one man on the platform standing at
full height, with his hand thrown up to heaven, and the hundred men
below standing straight, with arms up at full length, silent, and
almost motionless.

For a moment Craig held them so; and again his voice rang out,
louder, sterner than before--

'All who mean it, say, "By God's help I will."'  And back from a
hundred throats came deep and strong the words, 'By God's help, I
will.'

At this point Mrs. Mavor, whom I had quite forgotten, put her hand
on my arm.  'Go and tell him,' she panted, 'I want them to come on
Thursday night, as they used to in the other days--go--quick,' and
she almost pushed me out.  I gave Craig her message.  He held up
his hand for silence.

'Mrs. Mavor wishes me to say that she will be glad to see you all,
as in the old days, on Thursday evening; and I can think of no
better place to give formal expression to our pledge of this night'

There was a shout of acceptance; and then, at some one's call, the
long pent-up feelings of the crowd found vent in three mighty
cheers for Mrs. Mavor.

'Now for our old hymn,' called out Mr. Craig, 'and Mrs. Mavor will
lead us.'

He sat down at the organ, played a few bars of 'The Sweet By and
By,' and then Mrs. Mavor began.  But not a soul joined till the
refrain was reached, and then they sang as only men with their
hearts on fire can sing.  But after the last refrain Mr. Craig made
a sign to Mrs. Mavor, and she sang alone, slowly and softly, and
with eyes looking far away--


     'In the sweet by and by,
      We shall meet on that beautiful shore.'


There was no benediction--there seemed no need; and the men went
quietly out.  But over and over again the voice kept singing in my
ears and in my heart, 'We shall meet on that beautiful shore.'  And
after the sleigh-loads of men had gone and left the street empty,
as I stood with Craig in the radiant moonlight that made the great
mountains about come near us, from Sandy's sleigh we heard in the
distance Baptiste's French-English song; but the song that floated
down with the sound of the bells from the miners' sleigh was--


     'We shall meet on that beautiful shore.'


'Poor old Shaw!' said Craig softly.

When the last sound had died away I turned to him and said--

'You have won your fight.'

'We have won our fight; I was beaten,' he replied quickly, offering
me his hand.  Then, taking off his cap, and looking up beyond the
mountain-tops and the silent stars, he added softly, 'Our fight,
but His victory.'

And, thinking it all over, I could not say but perhaps he was
right.


CHAPTER IV

MRS. MAVOR'S STORY


The days that followed the Black Rock Christmas were anxious days
and weary, but not for the brightest of my life would I change them
now; for, as after the burning heat or rocking storm the dying day
lies beautiful in the tender glow of the evening, so these days
have lost their weariness and lie bathed in a misty glory. The
years that bring us many ills, and that pass so stormfully over us,
bear away with them the ugliness, the weariness, the pain that are
theirs, but the beauty, the sweetness, the rest they leave untouched,
for these are eternal.  As the mountains, that near at hand stand
jagged and scarred, in the far distance repose in their soft robes
of purple haze, so the rough present fades into the past, soft and
sweet and beautiful.

I have set myself to recall the pain and anxiety of those days and
nights when we waited in fear for the turn of the fever, but I can
only think of the patience and gentleness and courage of her who
stood beside me, bearing more than half my burden.  And while I can
see the face of Leslie Graeme, ghastly or flushed, and hear his low
moaning or the broken words of his delirium, I think chiefly of the
bright face bending over him, and of the cool, firm, swift-moving
hands that soothed and smoothed and rested, and the voice, like the
soft song of a bird in the twilight, that never failed to bring
peace.

Mrs. Mavor and I were much together during those days.  I made my
home in Mr. Craig's shack, but most of my time was spent beside my
friend.  We did not see much of Craig, for he was heart-deep with
the miners, laying plans for the making of the League the following
Thursday; and though he shared our anxiety and was ever ready to
relieve us, his thought and his talk had mostly to do with the
League.

Mrs. Mavor's evenings were given to the miners, but her afternoons
mostly to Graeme and to me, and then it was I saw another side of
her character.  We would sit in her little dining-room, where the
pictures on the walls, the quaint old silver, and bits of curiously
cut glass, all spoke of other and different days, and thence we
would roam the world of literature and art.  Keenly sensitive to
all the good and beautiful in these, she had her favourites among
the masters, for whom she was ready to do battle; and when her
argument, instinct with fancy and vivid imagination, failed, she
swept away all opposing opinion with the swift rush of her
enthusiasm; so that, though I felt she was beaten, I was left
without words to reply.  Shakespeare and Tennyson and Burns she
loved, but not Shelley, nor Byron, nor even Wordsworth.  Browning
she knew not, and therefore could not rank him with her noblest
three; but when I read to her 'A Death in the Desert,' and, came to
the noble words at the end of the tale--


     'For all was as I say, and now the man
      Lies as he once lay, breast to breast with God,'


the light shone in her eyes, and she said, 'Oh, that is good and
great; I shall get much out of him; I had always feared he was
impossible.'  And 'Paracelsus,' too, stirred her; but when I
recited the thrilling fragment, 'Prospice,' on to that closing
rapturous cry--


     'Then a light, then thy breast,
      O thou soul of my soul! I shall clasp thee again,
      And with God be the rest!'--


the red colour faded from her cheek, her breath came in a sob, and
she rose quickly and passed out without a word.  Ever after,
Browning was among her gods.  But when we talked of music, she,
adoring Wagner, soared upon the wings of the mighty Tannhauser, far
above, into regions unknown, leaving me to walk soberly with
Beethoven and Mendelssohn.  Yet with all our free, frank talk,
there was all the while that in her gentle courtesy which kept me
from venturing into any chamber of her life whose door she did not
set freely open to me.  So I vexed myself about her, and when Mr.
Craig returned the next week from the Landing where he had been for
some days, my first question was--

'Who is Mrs. Mavor?  And how in the name of all that is wonderful
and unlikely does she come to be here?  And why does she stay?'

He would not answer then; whether it was that his mind was full of
the coming struggle, or whether he shrank from the tale, I know
not; but that night, when we sat together beside his fire, he told
me the story, while I smoked.  He was worn with his long, hard
drive, and with the burden of his work, but as he went on with his
tale, looking into the fire as he told it, he forgot all his
present weariness and lived again the scenes he painted for me.
This was his story:--

'I remember well my first sight of her, as she sprang from the
front seat of the stage to the ground, hardly touching her
husband's hand.  She looked a mere girl.  Let's see--five years
ago--she couldn't have been a day over twenty three.  She looked
barely twenty.  Her swift glance swept over the group of miners at
the hotel door, and then rested on the mountains standing in all
their autumn glory.

'I was proud of our mountains that evening.  Turning to her
husband, she exclaimed: "O Lewis, are they not grand? and lovely,
too?"  Every miner lost his heart then and there, but all waited
for Abe the driver to give his verdict before venturing an opinion.
Abe said nothing until he had taken a preliminary drink, and then,
calling all hands to fill up, he lifted his glass high, and said
solemnly--

'"Boys, here's to her."

'Like a flash every glass was emptied, and Abe called out, "Fill
her up again, boys!  My treat!"

'He was evidently quite worked up.  Then he began, with solemn
emphasis--

'"Boys, you hear me!  She's a No. 1, triple X, the pure quill with
a bead on it: she's a--," and for the first time in his Black Rock
history Abe was stuck for a word.  Some one suggested "angel."

'"Angel!" repeated Abe, with infinite contempt.  "Angel be blowed,"
(I paraphrase here); "angels ain't in the same month with her; I'd
like to see any blanked angel swing my team around them curves
without a shiver."

'"Held the lines herself, Abe?" asked a miner.

'"That's what," said Abe; and then he went off into a fusilade of
scientific profanity, expressive of his esteem for the girl who had
swung his team round the curves; and the miners nodded to each
other, and winked their entire approval of Abe's performance, for
this was his specialty.

'Very decent fellow, Abe, but his talk wouldn't print.'

Here Craig paused, as if balancing Abe's virtues and vices.

'Well,' I urged, 'who is she?'

'Oh yes,' he said, recalling himself; 'she is an Edinburgh young
lady--met Lewis Mayor, a young Scotch-English man, in London--
wealthy, good family, and all that, but fast, and going to pieces
at home.  His people, who own large shares in these mines here, as
a last resort sent him out here to reform.  Curiously innocent
ideas those old country people have of the reforming properties of
this atmosphere!  They send their young bloods here to reform.
Here! in this devil's camp-ground, where a man's lust is his only
law, and when, from sheer monotony, a man must betake himself to
the only excitement of the place--that offered by the saloon.  Good
people in the east hold up holy hands of horror at these godless
miners; but I tell you it's asking these boys a good deal to keep
straight and clean in a place like this.  I take my excitement in
fighting the devil and doing my work generally, and that gives me
enough; but these poor chaps--hard worked, homeless, with no break
or change--God help them and me!' and his voice sank low.

'Well,' I persisted, 'did Mavor reform?'

Again he roused himself.  'Reform?  Not exactly.  In six-months he
had broken through all restraint; and, mind you, not the miners'
fault--not a miner helped him down.  It was a sight to make angels
weep when Mrs. Mavor would come to the saloon door for her husband.
Every miner would vanish; they could not look upon her shame, and
they would send Mavor forth in the charge of Billy Breen, a queer
little chap, who had belonged to the Mavors in some way in the old
country, and between them they would get him home.  How she stood
it puzzles me to this day; but she never made any sign, and her
courage never failed.  It was always a bright, brave, proud face
she held up to the world--except in church; there it was different.
I used to preach my sermons, I believe, mostly for her--but never
so that she could suspect--as bravely and as cheerily as I could.
And as she listened, and especially as she sang--how she used to
sing in those days!--there was no touch of pride in her face,
though the courage never died out, but appeal, appeal!  I could
have cursed aloud the cause of her misery, or wept for the pity of
it.  Before her baby was born he seemed to pull himself together,
for he was quite mad about her, and from the day the baby came--
talk about miracles!--from that day he never drank a drop.  She
gave the baby over to him, and the baby simply absorbed him.

'He was a new man.  He could not drink whisky and kiss his baby.
And the miners--it was really absurd if it were not so pathetic.
It was the first baby in Black Rock, and they used to crowd Mavor's
shop and peep into the room at the back of it--I forgot to tell you
that when he lost his position as manager he opened a hardware
shop, for his people chucked him, and he was too proud to write
home for money--just for a chance to be asked in to see the baby.
I came upon Nixon standing at the back of the shop after he had
seen the baby for the first time, sobbing hard, and to my question
he replied: "It's just like my own."  You can't understand this.
But to men who have lived so long in the mountains that they have
forgotten what a baby looks like, who have had experience of
humanity only in its roughest, foulest form, this little mite,
sweet and clean, was like an angel fresh from heaven, the one link
in all that black camp that bound them to what was purest and best
in their past.

'And to see the mother and her baby handle the miners!

'Oh, it was all beautiful beyond words!  I shall never forget the
shock I got one night when I found "Old Ricketts" nursing the baby.
A drunken old beast he was; but there he was sitting, sober enough,
making extraordinary faces at the baby, who was grabbing at his
nose and whiskers and cooing in blissful delight.  Poor "Old
Ricketts" looked as if he had been caught stealing, and muttering
something about having to go, gazed wildly round for some place in
which to lay the baby, when in came the mother, saying in her own
sweet, frank way: "O Mr. Ricketts" (she didn't find out till
afterwards his name was Shaw), "would you mind keeping her just a
little longer?--I shall be back in a few minutes."  And "Old
Ricketts" guessed he could wait.

'But in six months mother and baby, between them, transformed "Old
Ricketts" into Mr. Shaw, fire-boss of the mines.  And then in the
evenings, when she would be singing her baby to sleep, the little
shop would be full of miners, listening in dead silence to the
baby-songs, and the English songs, and the Scotch songs she poured
forth without stint, for she sang more for them than for her baby.
No wonder they adored her.  She was so bright, so gay, she brought
light with her when she went into the camp, into the pits--for she
went down to see the men work--or into a sick miner's shack; and
many a man, lonely and sick for home or wife, or baby or mother,
found in that back room cheer and comfort and courage, and to many
a poor broken wretch that room became, as one miner put it, "the
anteroom to heaven."'

Mr. Craig paused, and I waited.  Then he went on slowly--

'For a year and a half that was the happiest home in all the world,
till one day--'

He put his face in his hands, and shuddered.

'I don't think I can ever forget the awful horror of that bright
fall afternoon, when "Old Ricketts" came breathless to me and
gasped, "Come! for the dear Lord's sake," and I rushed after him.
At the mouth of the shaft lay three men dead.  One was Lewis Mavor.
He had gone down to superintend the running of a new drift; the two
men, half drunk with Slavin's whisky, set off a shot prematurely,
to their own and Mavor's destruction.  They were badly burned, but
his face was untouched.  A miner was sponging off the bloody froth
oozing from his lips.  The others were standing about waiting for
me to speak.  But I could find no word, for my heart was sick,
thinking, as they were, of the young mother and her baby waiting at
home.  So I stood, looking stupidly from one to the other, trying
to find some reason--coward that I was--why another should bear the
news rather than I.  And while we stood there, looking at one
another in fear, there broke upon us the sound of a voice mounting
high above the birch tops, singing--


     "Will ye no' come back again?
      Will ye no' come back again?
      Better lo'ed ye canna be,
      Will ye no' come back again?"


'A strange terror seized us.  Instinctively the men closed up in
front of the body, and stood in silence.  Nearer and nearer came
the clear, sweet voice, ringing like a silver bell up the steep--


     "Sweet the lav'rock's note and lang,
        Liltin' wildly up the glen,
      But aye tae me he sings ae sang,
        Will ye no' come back again?"


'Before the verse was finished "Old Ricketts" had dropped on his
knees, sobbing out brokenly, "O God! O God! have pity, have pity,
have pity!"--and every man took off his hat.  And still the voice
came nearer, singing so brightly the refrain,


     '"Will ye no' come back again?'


'It became unbearable.  "Old Ricketts" sprang suddenly to his feet,
and, gripping me by the arm, said piteously, "Oh, go to her! for
Heaven's sake, go to her!"  I next remember standing in her path
and seeing her holding out her hands full of red lilies, crying
out, "Are they not lovely?  Lewis is so fond of them!"  With the
promise of much finer ones I turned her down a path toward the
river, talking I know not what folly, till her great eyes grew
grave, then anxious, and my tongue stammered and became silent.
Then, laying her hand upon my arm, she said with gentle sweetness,
"Tell me your trouble, Mr. Craig," and I knew my agony had come,
and I burst out, "Oh, if it were only mine!"  She turned quite
white, and with her deep eyes--you've noticed her eyes--drawing the
truth out of mine, she said, "Is it mine, Mr. Craig, and my
baby's?"  I waited, thinking with what words to begin.  She put one
hand to her heart, and with the other caught a little poplar-tree
that shivered under her grasp, and said with white lips, but even
more gently, "Tell me."  I wondered at my voice being so steady as
I said, "Mrs. Mavor, God will help you and your baby.  There has
been an accident--and it is all over."

'She was a miner's wife, and there was no need for more.  I could
see the pattern of the sunlight falling through the trees upon the
grass.  I could hear the murmur of the river, and the cry of the
cat-bird in the bushes, but we seemed to be in a strange and unreal
world.  Suddenly she stretched out her hands to me, and with a
little moan said, "Take me to him."

'"Sit down for a moment or two," I entreated.

'"No, no! I am quite ready.  See," she added quietly, "I am quite
strong."

'I set off by a short cut leading to her home, hoping the men would
be there before us; but, passing me, she walked swiftly through the
trees, and I followed in fear.  As we came near the main path I
heard the sound of feet, and I tried to stop her, but she, too, had
heard and knew.  "Oh, let me go!" she said piteously; "you need not
fear."  And I had not the heart to stop her.  In a little opening
among the pines we met the bearers.  When the men saw her, they
laid their burden gently down upon the carpet of yellow pine-
needles, and then, for they had the hearts of true men in them,
they went away into the bushes and left her alone with her dead.
She went swiftly to his side, making no cry, but kneeling beside
him she stroked his face and hands, and touched his curls with her
fingers, murmuring all the time soft words of love.  "O my darling,
my bonnie, bonnie darling, speak to me!  Will ye not speak to me
just one little word?  O my love, my love, my heart's love!
Listen, my darling!"  And she put her lips to his ear, whispering,
and then the awful stillness.  Suddenly she lifted her head and
scanned his face, and then, glancing round with a wild surprise in
her eyes, she cried, "He will not speak to me!  Oh, he will not
speak to me!"  I signed to the men, and as they came forward I went
to her and took her hands.

'"Oh," she said with a wail in her voice; "he will not speak to
me."  The men were sobbing aloud.  She looked at them with wide-
open eyes of wonder.  "Why are they weeping?  Will he never speak
to me again?  Tell me," she insisted gently.  The words were
running through my head--


     '"There's a land that is fairer than day,"


and I said them over to her, holding her hands firmly in mine.  She
gazed at me as if in a dream, and the light slowly faded from her
eyes as she said, tearing her hands from mine and waving them
towards the mountains and the woods--

'"But never more here?  Never more here?"

'I believe in heaven and the other life, but I confess that for a
moment it all seemed shadowy beside the reality of this warm,
bright world, full of life and love.  She was very ill for two
nights, and when the coffin was closed a new baby lay in the
father's arms.

'She slowly came back to life, but there were no more songs.  The
miners still come about her shop, and talk to her baby, and bring
her their sorrows and troubles; but though she is always gentle,
almost tender, with them, no man ever says "Sing."  And that is why
I am glad she sang last week; it will be good for her and good for
them.'

'Why does she stay?' I asked.

'Mavor's people wanted her to go to them,' he replied.

'They have money--she told me about it, but her heart is in the
grave up there under the pines; and besides, she hopes to do
something for the miners, and she will not leave them.'

I am afraid I snorted a little impatiently as I said, 'Nonsense!
why, with her face, and manner, and voice she could be anything she
liked in Edinburgh or in London.'

'And why Edinburgh or London?' he asked coolly.

'Why?' I repeated a little hotly.  'You think this is better?'

'Nazareth was good enough for the Lord of glory,' he answered, with
a smile none too bright; but it drew my heart to him, and my heat
was gone.

'How long will she stay?' I asked.

'Till her work is done,' he replied.

'And when will that be?' I asked impatiently.

'When God chooses,' he answered gravely; 'and don't you ever think
but that it is worth while.  One value of work is not that crowds
stare at it.  Read history, man!'

He rose abruptly and began to walk about.  'And don't miss the
whole meaning of the Life that lies at the foundation of your
religion.  Yes,' he added to himself, 'the work is worth doing--
worth even her doing.'

I could not think so then, but the light of the after years proved
him wiser than I.  A man, to see far, must climb to some height,
and I was too much upon the plain in those days to catch even a
glimpse of distant sunlit uplands of triumphant achievement that
lie beyond the valley of self-sacrifice.


CHAPTER V

THE MAKING OF THE LEAGUE


Thursday morning found Craig anxious, even gloomy, but with fight
in every line of his face.  I tried to cheer him in my clumsy way
by chaffing him about his League.  But he did not blaze up as he
often did.  It was a thing too near his heart for that.  He only
shrank a little from my stupid chaff and said--

'Don't, old chap; this is a good deal to me.  I've tried for two
years to get this, and if it falls through now, I shall find it
hard to bear.'

Then I repented my light words and said, 'Why! the thing will go
sure enough: after that scene in the church they won't go back.'

'Poor fellows!' he said as if to himself; 'whisky is about the only
excitement they have, and they find it pretty tough to give it up;
and a lot of the men are against the total abstinence idea.  It
seems rot to them.'

'It is pretty steep,' I said.  'Can't you do without it?'

'No; I fear not.  There is nothing else for it.  Some of them talk
of compromise.  They want to quit the saloon and drink quietly in
their shacks.  The moderate drinker may have his place in other
countries, though I can't see it.  I haven't thought that out, but
here the only safe man is the man who quits it dead and fights it
straight; anything else is sheerest humbug and nonsense.'

I had not gone in much for total abstinence up to this time,
chiefly because its advocates seemed for the most part to be
somewhat ill-balanced; but as I listened to Craig, I began to feel
that perhaps there was a total abstinence side to the temperance
question; and as to Black Rock, I could see how it must be one
thing or the other.

We found Mrs. Mavor brave and bright.  She shared Mr. Craig's
anxiety but not his gloom.  Her courage was of that serene kind
that refuses to believe defeat possible, and lifts the spirit into
the triumph of final victory.  Through the past week she had been
carefully disposing her forces and winning recruits.  And yet she
never seemed to urge or persuade the men; but as evening after
evening the miners dropped into the cosy room downstairs, with her
talk and her songs she charmed them till they were wholly hers.
She took for granted their loyalty, trusted them utterly, and so
made it difficult for them to be other than true men.

That night Mrs. Mavor's large storeroom, which had been fitted up
with seats, was crowded with miners when Mr. Craig and I entered.

After a glance over the crowd, Craig said, 'There's the manager;
that means war.'  And I saw a tall man, very fair, whose chin fell
away to the vanishing point, and whose hair was parted in the
middle, talking to Mrs. Mavor.  She was dressed in some rich soft
stuff that became her well.  She was looking beautiful as ever, but
there was something quite new in her manner.  Her air of good-
fellowship was gone, and she was the high-bred lady, whose gentle
dignity and sweet grace, while very winning, made familiarity
impossible.

The manager was doing his best, and appeared to be well pleased
with himself.  'She'll get him if any one can.  I failed,' said
Craig.

I stood looking at the men, and a fine lot of fellows they were.
Free, easy, bold in their bearing, they gave no sign of rudeness;
and, from their frequent glances toward Mrs. Mavor, I could see
they were always conscious of her presence.  No men are so truly
gentle as are the Westerners in the presence of a good woman.  They
were evidently of all classes and ranks originally, but now, and in
this country of real measurements, they ranked simply according to
the 'man' in them.  'See that handsome, young chap of dissipated
appearance?' said Craig; 'that's Vernon Winton, an Oxford graduate,
blue blood, awfully plucky, but quite gone.  When he gets
repentant, instead of shooting himself, he comes to Mrs. Mavor.
Fact.'

'From Oxford University to Black Rock mining camp is something of a
step,' I replied.

'That queer-looking little chap in the corner is Billy Breen.  How
in the world has he got here?' went on Mr. Craig.  Queer-looking he
was.  A little man, with a small head set on heavy square
shoulders, long arms, and huge hands that sprawled all over his
body; altogether a most ungainly specimen of humanity.

By this time Mrs. Mavor had finished with the manager, and was in
the centre of a group of miners.  Her grand air was all gone, and
she was their comrade, their friend, one of themselves.  Nor did
she assume the role of entertainer, but rather did she, with half-
shy air, cast herself upon their chivalry, and they were too truly
gentlemen to fail her.  It is hard to make Western men, and
especially old-timers, talk.  But this gift was hers, and it
stirred my admiration to see her draw on a grizzled veteran to tell
how, twenty years ago, he had crossed the Great Divide, and had
seen and done what no longer fell to men to see or do in these new
days.  And so she won the old-timer.  But it was beautiful to see
the innocent guile with which she caught Billy Breen, and drew him
to her corner near the organ.  What she was saying I knew not, but
poor Billy was protesting, waving his big hands.

The meeting came to order, with Shaw in the chair, and the handsome
young Oxford man secretary.  Shaw stated the object of the meeting
in a few halting words; but when he came to speak of the pleasure
he and all felt in being together in that room, his words flowed in
a stream, warm and full.  Then there was a pause, and Mr. Craig was
called.  But he knew better than to speak at that point.  Finally
Nixon rose hesitatingly; but, as he caught a bright smile from Mrs.
Mavor, he straightened himself as if for a fight.

'I ain't no good at makin' speeches,' he began; 'but it ain't
speeches we want.  We've got somethin' to do, and what we want to
know is how to do it.  And to be right plain, we want to know how
to drive this cursed whisky out of Black Rock.  You all know what
it's doing for us--at least for some of us.  And it's time to stop
it now, or for some of us it'll mighty soon be too late.  And the
only way to stop its work is to quit drinkin' it and help others to
quit.  I hear some talk of a League, and what I say is, if it's a
League out and out against whisky, a Total Abstinence right to the
ground, then I'm with it--that's my talk--I move we make that kind
of League.'

Nixon sat down amid cheers and a chorus of remarks, 'Good man!'
'That's the talk!' 'Stay with it!' but he waited for the smile and
the glance that came to him from the beautiful face in the corner,
and with that he seemed content.

Again there was silence.  Then the secretary rose with a slight
flush upon his handsome, delicate face, and seconded the motion.
If they would pardon a personal reference he would give them his
reasons.  He had come to this country to make his fortune; now he
was anxious to make enough to enable him to go home with some
degree of honour.  His home held everything that was dear to him.
Between him and that home, between him and all that was good and
beautiful and honourable, stood whisky.  'I am ashamed to confess,'
and the flush deepened on his cheek, and his lips grew thinner,
'that I feel the need of some such league.'  His handsome face, his
perfect style of address, learned possibly in the 'Union,' but,
more than all, his show of nerve--for these men knew how to value
that--made a strong impression on his audience; but there were no
following cheers.

Mr. Craig appeared hopeful; but on Mrs. Mavor's face there was a
look of wistful, tender pity, for she knew how much the words had
cost the lad.

Then up rose a sturdy, hard-featured man, with a burr in his voice
that proclaimed his birth.  His name was George Crawford, I
afterwards learned, but every one called him Geordie.  He was a
character in his way, fond of his glass; but though he was never
known to refuse a drink, he was never known to be drunk.  He took
his drink, for the most part, with bread and cheese in his own
shack, or with a friend or two in a sober, respectable way, but
never could be induced to join the wild carousals in Slavin's
saloon.  He made the highest wages, but was far too true a Scot to
spend his money recklessly.  Every one waited eagerly to hear
Geordie's mind.  He spoke solemnly, as befitted a Scotsman
expressing a deliberate opinion, and carefully, as if choosing his
best English, for when Geordie became excited no one in Black Rock
could understand him.

'Maister Chairman,' said Geordie, 'I'm aye for temperance in a'
things.'  There was a shout of laughter, at which Geordie gazed
round in pained surprise.  'I'll no' deny,' he went on in an
explanatory tone, 'that I tak ma mornin', an' maybe a nip at noon;
an' a wee drap aifter wark in the evenin', an' whiles a sip o'
toddy wi' a freen thae cauld nichts.  But I'm no' a guzzler, an' I
dinna gang in wi' thae loons flingin' aboot guid money.'

'And that's thrue for you, me bye,' interrupted a rich Irish
brogue, to the delight of the crowd and the amazement of Geordie,
who went calmly on--

'An' I canna bide yon saloon whaur they sell sic awfu'-like stuff--
it's mair like lye nor guid whisky,--and whaur ye're never sure o'
yer richt change.  It's an awfu'-like place; man!'--and Geordie
began to warm up--'ye can juist smell the sulphur when ye gang in.
But I dinna care aboot thae Temperance Soceeities, wi' their
pledges an' havers; an' I canna see what hairm can come till a man
by takin' a bottle o' guid Glenlivet hame wi' him.  I canna bide
thae teetotal buddies.'

Geordie's speech was followed by loud applause, partly appreciative
of Geordie himself, but largely sympathetic with his position.

Two or three men followed in the same strain advocating a league
for mutual improvement and social purposes, but without the
teetotal pledge; they were against the saloon, but didn't see why
they should not take a drink now and then.

Finally the manager rose to support his 'friend, Mistah--ah--
Cwafoad,' ridiculing the idea of a total abstinence pledge as
fanatical and indeed 'absuad.'  He was opposed to the saloon, and
would like to see a club formed, with a comfortable club-room,
books, magazines, pictures, games, anything, 'dontcheknow, to make
the time pass pleasantly'; but it was 'absuad to ask men to abstain
fwom a pwopah use of--aw--nouwishing dwinks,' because some men made
beasts of themselves.  He concluded by offering $50.00 towards the
support of such a club.

The current of feeling was setting strongly against the total
abstinence idea, and Craig's face was hard and his eyes gleamed
like coals.  Then he did a bit of generalship.  He proposed that
since they had the two plans clearly before them they should take a
few minutes' intermission in which to make up their minds, and he
was sure they would be glad to have Mrs. Mavor sing.  In the
interval the men talked in groups, eagerly, even fiercely, hampered
seriously in the forceful expression of their opinion by the
presence of Mrs. Mavor, who glided from group to group, dropping a
word here and a smile there.  She reminded me of a general riding
along the ranks, bracing his men for the coming battle.  She paused
beside Geordie, spoke earnestly for a few moments, while Geordie
gazed solemnly at her, and then she came back to Billy in the
corner near me.  What she was saying I could not hear, but poor
Billy was protesting, spreading his hands out aimlessly before him,
but gazing at her the while in dumb admiration.  Then she came to
me.  'Poor Billy, he was good to my husband,' she said softly, 'and
he has a good heart.'

'He's not much to look at,' I could not help saying.

'The oyster hides its pearl,' she answered, a little reproachfully.

'The shell is apparent enough,' I replied, for the mischief was in
me.

'Ah yes,' she replied softly, 'but it is the pearl we love.'

I moved over beside Billy, whose eyes were following Mrs. Mavor as
she went to speak to Mr. Craig.  'Well,' I said; 'you all seem to
have a high opinion of her.'

'An 'igh hopinion,' he replied, in deep scorn.  'An 'igh hopinion,
you calls it.'

'What would you call it?' I asked, wishing to draw him out.

'Oi don't call it nothink,' he replied, spreading out his rough
hands.

'She seems very nice,' I said indifferently.

He drew his eyes away from Mrs. Mavor, and gave attention to me for
the first time.

'Nice!' he repeated with fine contempt; and then he added
impressively, 'Them as don't know shouldn't say nothink.'

'You are right,' I answered earnestly, 'and I am quite of your
opinion.'

He gave me a quick glance out of his little, deep-set, dark-blue
eyes, and opened his heart to me.  He told me, in his quaint
speech, how again and again she had taken him in and nursed him,
and encouraged him, and sent him out with a new heart for his
battle, until, for very shame's sake at his own miserable weakness,
he had kept out of her way for many months, going steadily down.

'Now, oi hain't got no grip; but when she says to me to-night, says
she, "Oh, Billy"--she calls me Billy to myself' (this with a touch
of pride)--'"oh, Billy," says she, "we must 'ave a total
habstinence league to-night, and oi want you to 'elp!" and she
keeps a-lookin' at me with those heyes o' hern till, if you believe
me, sir,' lowering his voice to an emphatic whisper, 'though oi
knowed oi couldn't 'elp none, afore oi knowed oi promised 'er oi
would.  It's 'er heyes.  When them heyes says "do," hup you steps
and "does."'

I remembered my first look into her eyes, and I could quite
understand Billy's submission.  Just as she began to sing I went
over to Geordie and took my seat beside him.  She began with an
English slumber song, 'Sleep, Baby, Sleep'--one of Barry
Cornwall's, I think,--and then sang a love-song with the refrain,
'Love once again'; but no thrills came to me, and I began to wonder
if her spell over me was broken.  Geordie, who had been listening
somewhat indifferently, encouraged me, however, by saying, 'She's
just pittin' aff time with thae feckless sangs; man, there's nae
grup till them.'  But when, after a few minutes' pause, she began
'My Ain Fireside,' Geordie gave a sigh of satisfaction.  'Ay,
that's somethin' like,' and when she finished the first verse he
gave me a dig in the ribs with his elbow that took my breath away,
saying in a whisper, 'Man, hear till yon, wull ye?'  And again I
found the spell upon me.  It was not the voice after all, but the
great soul behind that thrilled and compelled.  She was seeing,
feeling, living what she sang, and her voice showed us her heart.
The cosy fireside, with its bonnie, blithe blink, where no care
could abide, but only peace and love, was vividly present to her,
and as she sang we saw it too.  When she came to the last verse--


     'When I draw in my stool
        On my cosy hearth-stane,
      My heart loups sae licht
        I scarce ken't for my ain,'


there was a feeling of tears in the flowing song, and we knew the
words had brought her a picture of the fireside that would always
seem empty.  I felt the tears in my eyes, and, wondering at myself,
I cast a stealthy glance at the men about me; and I saw that they,
too, were looking through their hearts' windows upon firesides and
ingle-neuks that gleamed from far.

And then she sang 'The Auld Hoose,' and Geordie, giving me another
poke, said, 'That's ma ain sang,' and when I asked him what he
meant, he whispered fiercely, 'Wheesht, man!' and I did, for his
face looked dangerous.

In a pause between the verses I heard Geordie saying to himself,
'Ay, I maun gie it up, I doot.'

'What?' I ventured.

'Naething ava.'  And then he added impatiently, 'Man, but ye're an
inqueesitive buddie,' after which I subsided into silence.

Immediately upon the meeting being called to order, Mr. Craig made
his speech, and it was a fine bit of work.  Beginning with a clear
statement of the object in view, he set in contrast the two kinds
of leagues proposed.  One, a league of men who would take whisky in
moderation; the other, a league of men who were pledged to drink
none themselves, and to prevent in every honourable way others from
drinking.  There was no long argument, but he spoke at white heat;
and as he appealed to the men to think, each not of himself alone,
but of the others as well, the yearning, born of his long months of
desire and of toil, vibrated in his voice and reached to the heart.
Many men looked uncomfortable and uncertain, and even the manager
looked none too cheerful.

At this critical moment the crowd got a shock.  Billy Breen
shuffled out to the front, and, in a voice shaking with nervousness
and emotion, began to speak, his large, coarse hands wandering
tremulously about.

'Oi hain't no bloomin' temperance horator, and mayhap oi hain't no
right to speak 'ere, but oi got somethin' to saigh (say) and oi'm
agoin' to saigh it.

'Parson, 'ee says is it wisky or no wisky in this 'ere club?  If ye
hask me, wich (which) ye don't, then no wisky, says oi; and if ye
hask why?--look at me!  Once oi could mine more coal than hany man
in the camp; now oi hain't fit to be a sorter.  Once oi 'ad some
pride and hambition; now oi 'angs round awaitin' for some one to
saigh, "Ere, Billy, 'ave summat."  Once oi made good paigh (pay),
and sent it 'ome regular to my poor old mother (she's in the wukus
now, she is); oi hain't sent 'er hany for a year and a 'alf.  Once
Billy was a good fellow and 'ad plenty o' friends; now Slavin
'isself kicks un hout, 'ee does.  Why? why?'  His voice rose to a
shriek.  'Because when Billy 'ad money in 'is pocket, hevery man in
this bloomin' camp as meets un at hevery corner says, "'Ello,
Billy, wat'll ye 'ave?"  And there's wisky at Slavin's, and there's
wisky in the shacks, and hevery 'oliday and hevery Sunday there's
wisky, and w'en ye feel bad it's wisky, and w'en ye feel good it's
wisky, and heverywhere and halways it's wisky, wisky, wisky!  And
now ye're goin' to stop it, and 'ow?  T' manager, 'ee says picters
and magazines.  'Ee takes 'is wine and 'is beer like a gentleman,
'ee does, and 'ee don't 'ave no use for Billy Breen.  Billy, 'ee's
a beast, and t' manager, 'ee kicks un hout.  But supposin' Billy
wants to stop bein' a beast, and starts a-tryin' to be a man again,
and w'en 'ee gets good an' dry, along comes some un and says,
"'Ello, Billy, 'ave a smile," it hain't picters nor magazines 'ud
stop un then.  Picters and magazines!  Gawd 'elp the man as hain't
nothin' but picters and magazines to 'elp un w'en 'ee's got a devil
hinside and a devil houtside a-shovin' and a-drawin' of un down to
'ell.  And that's w'ere oi'm a-goin' straight, and yer bloomin'
League, wisky or no wisky, can't help me.  But,' and he lifted his
trembling hands above his head, 'if ye stop the wisky a-flowin'
round this camp, ye'll stop some of these lads that's a-followin'
me 'ard.  Yes, you! and you! and you!' and his voice rose to a wild
scream as he shook a trembling finger at one and another.

'Man, it's fair gruesome tae hear him,' said Geordie; 'he's no'
canny'; and reaching out for Billy as he went stumbling past, he
pulled him down to a seat beside him, saying, 'Sit doon, lad, sit
doon.  We'll mak a man o' ye yet.'  Then he rose and, using many
r's, said, 'Maister Chairman, a' doot we'll juist hae to gie it
up.'

'Give it up?' called out Nixon.  'Give up the League?'

'Na! na! lad, but juist the wee drap whusky.  It's nae that guid
onyway, and it's a terrible price.  Man, gin ye gang tae
Henderson's in Buchanan Street, in Gleska, ye ken, ye'll get mair
for three-an'-saxpence than ye wull at Slavin's for five dollars.
An' it'll no' pit ye mad like yon stuff, but it gangs doon smooth
an' saft-like.  But' (regretfully) 'ye'll no' can get it here; an'
a'm thinkin' a'll juist sign yon teetotal thing.'  And up he strode
to the table and put his name down in the book Craig had ready.
Then to Billy he said, 'Come' awa, lad! pit yer name doon, an'
we'll stan' by ye.'

Poor Billy looked around helplessly, his nerve all gone, and sat
still.  There was a swift rustle of garments, and Mrs. Mavor was
beside him, and, in a voice that only Billy and I could hear, said,
'You'll sign with, me, Billy?'

Billy gazed at her with a hopeless look in his eyes, and shook his
little, head.  She leaned slightly toward him, smiling brightly,
and, touching his arm gently, said--

'Come, Billy, there's no fear,' and in a lower voice, 'God will
help you.'

As Billy went up, following Mrs. Mavor close, a hush fell on the
men until he had put his name to the pledge; then they came up, man
by man, and signed.  But Craig sat with his head down till I
touched his shoulder.  He took my hand and held it fast, saying
over and over, under his breath, 'Thank God, thank God!'

And so the League was made.


CHAPTER VI

BLACK ROCK RELIGION


When I grow weary with the conventions of religion, and sick in my
soul from feeding upon husks, that the churches too often offer me,
in the shape of elaborate service and eloquent discourses, so that
in my sickness I doubt and doubt, then I go back to the communion
in Black Rock and the days preceding it, and the fever and the
weariness leave me, and I grow humble and strong.  The simplicity
and rugged grandeur of the faith, the humble gratitude of the rough
men I see about the table, and the calm radiance of one saintly
face, rest and recall me.

Not its most enthusiastic apologist would call Black Rock a
religious community, but it possessed in a marked degree that
eminent Christian virtue of tolerance.  All creeds, all shades of
religious opinion, were allowed, and it was generally conceded that
one was as good as another.  It is fair to say, however, that Black
Rock's catholicity was negative rather than positive.  The only
religion objectionable was that insisted upon as a necessity.  It
never occurred to any one to consider religion other than as a
respectable, if not ornamental, addition to life in older lands.

During the weeks following the making of the League, however, this
negative attitude towards things religious gave place to one of
keen investigation and criticism.  The indifference passed away,
and with it, in a large measure, the tolerance.  Mr. Craig was
responsible for the former of these changes, but hardly, in
fairness, could he be held responsible for the latter.  If any one,
more than another, was to be blamed for the rise of intolerance in
the village, that man was Geordie Crawford.  He had his 'lines'
from the Established Kirk of Scotland, and when Mr. Craig announced
his intention of having the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
observed, Geordie produced his 'lines' and promptly handed them in.
As no other man in the village was equipped with like spiritual
credentials, Geordie constituted himself a kind of kirk-session,
charged with the double duty of guarding the entrance to the Lord's
Table, and of keeping an eye upon the theological opinions of the
community, and more particularly upon such members of it as gave
evidence of possessing any opinions definite enough for statement.

It came to be Mr. Craig's habit to drop into the League-room, and
toward the close of the evening to have a short Scripture lesson
from the Gospels.  Geordie's opportunity came after the meeting was
over and Mr. Craig had gone away.  The men would hang about and
talk the lesson over, expressing opinions favourable or unfavourable
as appeared to them good.  Then it was that all sorts of views,
religious and otherwise, were aired and examined.  The originality
of the ideas, the absolute disregard of the authority of church or
creed, the frankness with which opinions were stated, and the
forcefulness of the language in which they were expressed, combined
to make the discussions altogether marvellous.  The passage between
Abe Baker, the stage-driver, and Geordie was particularly rich.  It
followed upon a very telling lesson on the parable of the Pharisee
and the Publican.

The chief actors in that wonderful story were transferred to the
Black Rock stage, and were presented in miner's costume.  Abe was
particularly well pleased with the scoring of the 'blanked old
rooster who crowed so blanked high,' and somewhat incensed at the
quiet remark interjected by Geordie, 'that it was nae credit till a
man tae be a sinner'; and when Geordie went on to urge the
importance of right conduct and respectability, Abe was led to pour
forth vials of contemptuous wrath upon the Pharisees and hypocrites
who thought themselves better than other people.  But Geordie was
quite unruffled, and lamented the ignorance of men who, brought up
in 'Epeescopawlyun or Methody' churches, could hardly be expected
to detect the Antinomian or Arminian heresies.

'Aunty Nomyun or Uncle Nomyun,' replied Abe, boiling hot, 'my
mother was a Methodist, and I'll back any blanked Methodist
against any blankety blank long-faced, lantern-jawed, skinflint
Presbyterian,' and this he was eager to maintain to any man's
satisfaction if he would step outside.

Geordie was quite unmoved, but hastened to assure Abe that he meant
no disrespect to his mother, who he had 'nae doot was a clever
enough buddie, tae judge by her son.'  Abe was speedily appeased,
and offered to set up the drinks all round.  But Geordie, with
evident reluctance, had to decline, saying, 'Na, na, lad, I'm a
League man ye ken,' and I was sure that Geordie at that moment felt
that membership in the League had its drawbacks.

Nor was Geordie too sure of Craig's orthodoxy; while as to Mrs.
Mavor, whose slave he was, he was in the habit of lamenting her
doctrinal condition--

'She's a fine wumman, nae doot; but, puir cratur, she's fair
carried awa wi' the errors o' thae Epeescopawlyuns.'

It fell to Geordie, therefore, as a sacred duty, in view of the
laxity of those who seemed to be the pillars of the Church, to be
all the more watchful and unyielding.  But he was delightfully
inconsistent when confronted with particulars.  In conversation
with him one night after one of the meetings, when he had been
specially hard upon the ignorant and godless, I innocently changed
the subject to Billy Breen, whom Geordie had taken to his shack
since the night of the League.  He was very proud of Billy's
success in the fight against whisky, the credit of which he divided
unevenly between Mrs. Mavor and himself.

'He's fair daft aboot her,' he explained to me, 'an' I'll no' deny
but she's a great help, ay, a verra conseederable asseestance; but,
man, she doesna ken the whusky, an' the inside o' a man that's
wantin' it.  Ay, puir buddie, she diz her pairt, an' when ye're a
bit restless an thrawn aifter yer day's wark, it's like a walk in a
bonnie glen on a simmer eve, with the birds liltin' aboot, tae sit
in yon roomie and hear her sing; but when the night is on, an' ye
canna sleep, but wauken wi' an' awfu' thurst and wi' dreams o' cosy
firesides, and the bonnie sparklin' glosses, as it is wi' puir
Billy, ay, it's then ye need a man wi' a guid grup beside ye.'

'What do you do then, Geordie?' I asked.

'Oo ay, I juist gang for a bit walk wi' the lad, and then pits the
kettle on an' maks a cup o' tea or coffee, an' aff he gangs tae
sleep like a bairn.'

'Poor Billy,' I said pityingly, 'there's no hope for him in the
future, I fear.'

'Hoot awa, man,' said Geordie quickly.  'Ye wadna keep oot a puir
cratur frae creepin' in, that's daein' his best?'

'But, Geordie,' I remonstrated, 'he doesn't know anything of the
doctrines.  I don't believe he could give us "The Chief End of
Man."'

'An' wha's tae blame for that?' said Geordie, with fine
indignation.  'An' maybe you remember the prood Pharisee and the
puir wumman that cam' creepin' in ahint the Maister.'

The mingled tenderness and indignation in Geordie's face were
beautiful to see, so I meekly answered, 'Well, I hope Mr. Craig
won't be too strict with the boys.'

Geordie shot a suspicious glance at me, but I kept my face like a
summer morn, and he replied cautiously--

'Ay, he's no' that streect: but he maun exerceese discreemination.'

Geordie was none the less determined, however, that Billy should
'come forrit'; but as to the manager, who was a member of the
English Church, and some others who had been confirmed years ago,
and had forgotten much and denied more, he was extremely doubtful,
and expressed himself in very decided words to the minister--

'Ye'll no' be askin' forrit thae Epeescopawlyun buddies.  They
juist ken naething ava.'

But Mr. Craig looked at him for a moment and said, "Him that cometh
unto Me I will in no wise cast out,"' and Geordie was silent,
though he continued doubtful.

With all these somewhat fantastic features, however, there was no
mistaking the earnest spirit of the men.  The meetings grew larger
every night, and the interest became more intense.  The singing
became different.  The men no longer simply shouted, but as Mr.
Craig would call attention to the sentiment of the hymn, the voices
would attune themselves to the words.  Instead of encouraging
anything like emotional excitement, Mr. Craig seemed to fear it.

'These chaps are easily stirred up,' he would say, 'and I am
anxious that they should know exactly what they are doing.  It is
far too serious a business to trifle with.'

Although Graeme did not go downstairs to the meetings, he could not
but feel the throb of the emotion beating in the heart of the
community.  I used to detail for his benefit, and sometimes for his
amusement, the incidents of each night.  But I never felt quite
easy in dwelling upon the humorous features in Mrs. Mavor's
presence, although Craig did not appear to mind.  His manner with
Graeme was perfect.  Openly anxious to win him to his side, he did
not improve the occasion and vex him with exhortation.  He would
not take him at a disadvantage, though, as I afterwards found, this
was not his sole reason for his method.  Mrs. Mavor, too, showed
herself in wise and tender light.  She might have been his sister,
so frank was she and so openly affectionate, laughing at his
fretfulness and soothing his weariness.

Never were better comrades than we four, and the bright days
speeding so swiftly on drew us nearer to one another.

But the bright days came to an end; for Graeme, when once he was
able to go about, became anxious to get back to the camp.  And so
the last day came, a day I remember well.  It was a bright, crisp
winter day.

The air was shimmering in the frosty light.  The mountains, with
their shining heads piercing through light clouds into that
wonderful blue of the western sky, and their feet pushed into the
pine masses, gazed down upon Black Rock with calm, kindly looks on
their old grey faces.  How one grows to love them, steadfast old
friends!  Far up among the pines we could see the smoke of the
engine at the works, and so still and so clear was the mountain air
that we could hear the puff of the steam, and from far down the
river the murmur of the rapids.  The majestic silence, the tender
beauty, the peace, the loneliness, too, came stealing in upon us,
as we three, leaving Mrs. Mavor behind us, marched arm-in-arm down
the street.  We had not gone far on our way, when Graeme, turning
round, stood a moment looking back, then waved his hand in
farewell.  Mrs. Mavor was at her window, smiling and waving in
return.  They had grown to be great friends these two; and seemed
to have arrived at some understanding.  Certainly, Graeme's manner
to her was not that he bore to other women.  His half-quizzical,
somewhat superior air of mocking devotion gave place to a simple,
earnest, almost tender, respect, very new to him, but very winning.

As he stood there waving his farewell, I glanced at his face and
saw for a moment what I had not seen for years, a faint flush on
Graeme's cheek and a light of simple, earnest faith in his eyes.
It reminded me of my first look of him when he had come up for his
matriculation to the 'Varsity.  He stood on the campus looking up at
the noble old pile, and there was the same bright, trustful,
earnest look on his boyish face.

I know not what spirit possessed me; it may have been the pain of
the memory working in me, but I said, coarsely enough, 'It's no
use, Graeme, my boy; I would fall in love with her myself, but
there would be no chance even for me.'

The flush slowly darkened as he turned and said deliberately--

'It's not like you, Connor, to be an ass of that peculiar kind.
Love!--not exactly!  She won't fall in love unless--' and he
stopped abruptly with his eyes upon Craig.

But Craig met him with unshrinking gaze, quietly remarking, 'Her
heart is under the pines'; and we moved on, each thinking his own
thoughts, and guessing at the thoughts of the others.

We were on our way to Craig's shack, and as we passed the saloon
Slavin stepped from the door with a salutation.  Graeme paused.
'Hello, Slavin!  I got rather the worst of it, didn't I?'

Slavin came near, and said earnestly, 'It was a dirty thrick
altogether; you'll not think it was moine, Mr. Graeme.'

'No, no, Slavin! you stood up like a man,' said Graeme cheerfully.

'And you bate me fair; an' bedad it was a nate one that laid me
out; an' there's no grudge in me heart till ye.'

'All right, Slavin; we'll perhaps understand each other better
after this.'

'An' that's thrue for yez, sor; an' I'll see that your byes don't
get any more than they ask for,' replied Slavin, backing away.

'And I hope that won't be much,' put in Mr. Craig; but Slavin only
grinned.

When we came to Craig's shack Graeme was glad to rest in the big
chair.

Craig made him a cup of tea, while I smoked, admiring much the deft
neatness of the minister's housekeeping, and the gentle, almost
motherly, way he had with Graeme.

In our talk we drifted into the future, and Craig let us see what
were his ambitions.  The railway was soon to come; the resources
were, as yet, unexplored, but enough was known to assure a great
future for British Columbia.  As he talked his enthusiasm grew, and
carried us away.  With the eye of a general he surveyed the
country, fixed the strategic points which the Church must seize
upon.  Eight good men would hold the country from Fort Steele to
the coast, and from Kootenay to Cariboo.

'The Church must be in with the railway; she must have a hand in
the shaping of the country.  If society crystallises without her
influence, the country is lost, and British Columbia will be
another trap-door to the bottomless pit.'

'What do you propose?' I asked.

'Organising a little congregation here in Black Rock.'

'How many will you get?'

'Don't know.'

'Pretty hopeless business,' I said.

'Hopeless! hopeless!' he cried; 'there were only twelve of us at
first to follow Him, and rather a poor lot they were.  But He
braced them up, and they conquered the world.'

'But surely things are different,' said Graeme.

'Things?  Yes! yes!  But He is the same.'  His face had an exalted
look, and his eyes were gazing into far-away places.

'A dozen men in Black Rock with some real grip of Him would make
things go.  We'll get them, too,' he went on in growing excitement.
'I believe in my soul we'll get them.'

'Look here, Craig; if you organise I'd like to join,' said Graeme
impulsively.  'I don't believe much in your creed or your Church,
but I'll be blowed if I don't believe in you.'

Craig looked at him with wistful eyes, and shook his head.  'It
won't do, old chap, you know.  I can't hold you.  You've got to
have a grip of some one better than I am; and then, besides, I
hardly like asking you now'; he hesitated--'well, to be out-and-
out, this step must be taken not for my sake, nor for any man's
sake, and I fancy that perhaps you feel like pleasing me just now
a little.'

'That I do, old fellow,' said Graeme, putting out his hand.  'I'll
be hanged if I won't do anything you say.'

'That's why I won't say,' replied Craig.  Then reverently he added,
'the organisation is not mine.  It is my Master's.'

'When are you going to begin?' asked Graeme.

'We shall have our communion service in two weeks, and that will be
our roll-call.'

'How many will answer?' I asked doubtfully.

'I know of three,' he said quietly.

'Three!  There are two hundred miners and one hundred and fifty
lumbermen!  Three!' and Graeme looked at him in amazement.  'You
think it worth while to organise three?'

'Well,' replied Craig, smiling for the first time, 'the
organisation won't be elaborate, but it will be effective, and,
besides, loyalty demands obedience.'

We sat long that afternoon talking, shrinking from the breaking up;
for we knew that we were about to turn down a chapter in our lives
which we should delight to linger over in after days.  And in my
life there is but one brighter.  At last we said good-bye and drove
away; and though many farewells have come in between that day and
this, none is so vividly present to me as that between us three
men.  Craig's manner with me was solemn enough.  '"He that loveth
his life"; good-bye, don't fool with this,' was what he said to me.
But when he turned to Graeme his whole face lit up.  He took him by
the shoulders and gave him a little shake, looking into his eyes,
and saying over and over in a low, sweet tone--

'You'll come, old chap, you'll come, you'll come.  Tell me you'll
come.'

And Graeme could say nothing in reply, but only looked at him.
Then they silently shook hands, and we drove off.  But long after
we had got over the mountain and into the winding forest road on
the way to the lumber-camp the voice kept vibrating in my heart,
'You'll come, you'll come,' and there was a hot pain in my throat.

We said little during the drive to the camp.  Graeme was thinking
hard, and made no answer when I spoke to him two or three times,
till we came to the deep shadows of the pine forest, when with a
little shiver he said--

'It is all a tangle--a hopeless tangle.'

'Meaning what?' I asked.

'This business of religion--what quaint varieties--Nelson's,
Geordie's, Billy Breen's--if he has any--then Mrs. Mavor's--she is
a saint, of course--and that fellow Craig's.  What a trump he is!--
and without his religion he'd be pretty much like the rest of us.
It is too much for me.'

His mystery was not mine.  The Black Rock varieties of religion
were certainly startling; but there was undoubtedly the streak of
reality though them all, and that discovery I felt to be a distinct
gain.


CHAPTER VII

THE FIRST BLACK ROCK COMMUNION


The gleam of the great fire through the windows of the great camp
gave a kindly welcome as we drove into the clearing in which the
shanties stood.  Graeme was greatly touched at his enthusiastic
welcome by the men.  At the supper-table he made a little speech of
thanks for their faithfulness during his absence, specially
commending the care and efficiency of Mr. Nelson, who had had
charge of the camp.  The men cheered wildly, Baptiste's shrill
voice leading all.  Nelson being called upon, expressed in a few
words his pleasure at seeing the Boss back, and thanked the men for
their support while he had been in charge.

The men were for making a night of it; but fearing the effect upon
Graeme, I spoke to Nelson, who passed the word, and in a short time
the camp was quiet.  As we sauntered from the grub-camp to the
office where was our bed, we paused to take in the beauty of the
night.  The moon rode high over the peaks of the mountains,
flooding the narrow valley with mellow light.  Under her magic the
rugged peaks softened their harsh lines and seemed to lean lovingly
toward us.  The dark pine masses stood silent as in breathless
adoration; the dazzling snow lay like a garment over all the open
spaces in soft, waving folds, and crowned every stump with a
quaintly shaped nightcap.  Above the camps the smoke curled up from
the camp-fires, standing like pillars of cloud that kept watch
while men slept.  And high over all the deep blue night sky, with
its star jewels, sprang like the roof of a great cathedral from
range to range, covering us in its kindly shelter.  How homelike
and safe seemed the valley with its mountain-sides, its sentinel
trees and arching roof of jewelled sky!  Even the night seemed
kindly, and friendly the stars; and the lone cry of the wolf from
the deep forest seemed like the voice of a comrade.

'How beautiful! too beautiful!' said Graeme, stretching out his
arms.  'A night like this takes the heart out of me.'

I stood silent, drinking in at every sense the night with its
wealth of loveliness.

'What is it I want?' he went on.  'Why does the night make my heart
ache?  There are things to see and things to hear just beyond me; I
cannot get to them.'  The gay, careless look was gone from his
face, his dark eyes were wistful with yearning.

'I often wonder if life has nothing better for me,' he continued
with his heartache voice.

I said no word, but put my arm within his.  A light appeared in the
stable.  Glad of a diversion, I said, 'What is the light?  Let us
go and see.'

'Sandy, taking a last look at his team, like enough.'

We walked slowly toward the stable, speaking no word.  As we neared
the door we heard the sound of a voice in the monotone of one
reading.  I stepped forward and looked through a chink between the
logs.  Graeme was about to open the door, but I held up my hand and
beckoned him to me.  In a vacant stall, where was a pile of straw,
a number of men were grouped.  Sandy, leaning against the tying-
post upon which the stable-lantern hung, was reading; Nelson was
kneeling in front of him and gazing into the gloom beyond; Baptiste
lay upon his stomach, his chin in his hands and his upturned eyes
fastened upon Sandy's face; Lachlan Campbell sat with his hands
clasped about his knees, and two other men sat near him.  Sandy was
reading the undying story of the Prodigal, Nelson now and then
stopping him to make a remark.  It was a scene I have never been
able to forget.  To-day I pause in my tale, and see it as clearly
as when I looked through the chink upon it years ago.  The long,
low stable, with log walls and upright hitching-poles; the dim
outlines of the horses in the gloom of the background, and the
little group of rough, almost savage-looking men, with faces
wondering and reverent, lit by the misty light of the stable-
lantern.

After the reading, Sandy handed the book to Nelson, who put it in
his pocket, saying, 'That's for us, boys, ain't it?'

'Ay,' said Lachlan; 'it is often that has been read in my hearing,
but I am afraid it will not be for me whatever,' and he swayed
himself slightly as he spoke, and his voice was full of pain.

'The minister said I might come,' said old Nelson, earnestly and
hopefully.

'Ay, but you are not Lachlan Campbell, and you hef not had his
privileges.  My father was a godly elder in the Free Church of
Scotland, and never a night or morning but we took the Books.'

'Yes, but He said "any man,"' persisted Nelson, putting his hand on
Lachlan's knee.  But Lachlan shook his head.

'Dat young feller,' said Baptiste; 'wha's hees nem, heh?'

'He has no name.  It is just a parable,' explained Sandy.

'He's got no nem?  He's just a parom'ble?  Das no young feller?'
asked Baptiste anxiously; 'das mean noting?'

Then Nelson took him in hand and explained to him the meaning,
while Baptiste listened even more eagerly, ejaculating softly, 'ah,
voila! bon! by gar!'  When Nelson had finished he broke out, 'Dat
young feller, his name Baptiste, heh? and de old Fadder he's le bon
Dieu?  Bon! das good story for me.  How you go back?  You go to de
pries'?'

'The book doesn't say priest or any one else,' said Nelson.  'You
go back in yourself, you see?'

'Non; das so, sure nuff.  Ah!'--as if a light broke in upon him--
'you go in your own self.  You make one leetle prayer.  You say,
"Le bon Fadder, oh! I want come back, I so tire, so hongree, so
sorree"?  He, say, "Come right 'long."  Ah! das fuss-rate.  Nelson,
you make one leetle prayer for Sandy and me.'

And Nelson lifted up his face and said: 'Father, we're all gone far
away; we have spent all, we are poor, we are tired of it all; we
want to feel different, to be different; we want to come back.
Jesus came to save us from our sins; and he said if we came He
wouldn't cast us out, no matter how bad we were, if we only came to
Him.  Oh, Jesus Christ'--and his old, iron face began to work, and
two big tears slowly came from under his eyelids--'we are a poor
lot, and I'm the worst of the lot, and we are trying to find the
way.  Show us how to get back.  Amen.'

'Bon!' said Baptiste.  'Das fetch Him sure!'

Graeme pulled me away, and without a word we went into the office
and drew up to the little stove.  Graeme was greatly moved.

'Did you ever see anything like that?' he asked.  'Old Nelson! the
hardest, savagest, toughest old sinner in the camp, on his knees
before a lot of men!'

'Before God,' I could not help saying, for the thing seemed very
real to me.  The old man evidently felt himself talking to some
one.

'Yes, I suppose you're right,' said Graeme doubtfully; 'but there's
a lot of stuff I can't swallow.'

'When you take medicine you don't swallow the bottle,' I replied,
for his trouble was not mine.

'If I were sure of the medicine, I wouldn't mind the bottle, and
yet it acts well enough,' he went on.  'I don't mind Lachlan; he's
a Highland mystic, and has visions, and Sandy's almost as bad, and
Baptiste is an impulsive little chap.  Those don't count much.  But
old man Nelson is a cool-blooded, level-headed old fellow; has seen
a lot of life, too.  And then there's Craig.  He has a better head
than I have, and is as hot-blooded, and yet he is living and
slaving away in that hole, and really enjoys it.  There must be
something in it.'

'Oh, look here, Graeme,' I burst out impatiently; 'what's the use
of your talking like that?  Of course there's something in it.  I
here's everything in it.  The trouble with me is I can't face the
music.  It calls for a life where a fellow must go in for straight,
steady work, self-denial, and that sort of thing; and I'm too
Bohemian for that, and too lazy.  But that fellow Craig makes one
feel horribly uncomfortable.'

Graeme put his head on one side, and examined me curiously.

'I believe you're right about yourself.  You always were a
luxurious beggar.  But that's not where it catches me.'

We sat and smoked and talked of other things for an hour, and then
turned in.  As I was dropping off I was roused by Graeme's voice--

'Are you going to the preparatory service on Friday night?'

'Don't know,' I replied rather sleepily.

'I say, do you remember the preparatory service at home?'  There
was something in his voice that set me wide awake.

'Yes.  Rather terrific, wasn't it?  But I always felt better after
it,' I replied.

'To me'--he was sitting up in bed now--'to me it was like a call to
arms, or rather like a call for a forlorn hope.  None but
volunteers wanted.  Do you remember the thrill in the old
governor's voice as he dared any but the right stuff to come on?'

'We'll go in on Friday night,' I said.

And so we did.  Sandy took a load of men with his team, and Graeme
and I drove in the light sleigh.

The meeting was in the church, and over a hundred men were present.
There was some singing of familiar hymns at first, and then Mr.
Craig read the same story as we had heard in the stable, that most
perfect of all parables, the Prodigal Son.  Baptiste nudged Sandy
in delight, and whispered something, but Sandy held his face so
absolutely expressionless that Graeme was moved to say--

'Look at Sandy!  Did you ever see such a graven image?  Something
has hit him hard.'

The men were held fast by the story.  The voice of the reader, low,
earnest, and thrilling with the tender pathos of the tale, carried
the words to our hearts, while a glance, a gesture, a movement of
the body gave us the vision of it all as he was seeing it.

Then, in simplest of words, he told us what the story meant,
holding us the while with eyes, and voice, and gesture.  He
compelled us scorn the gay, heartless selfishness of the young fool
setting forth so jauntily from the broken home; he moved our pity
and our sympathy for the young profligate, who, broken and
deserted, had still pluck enough to determine to work his way back,
and who, in utter desperation, at last gave it up; and then he
showed us the homecoming--the ragged, heart-sick tramp, with
hesitating steps, stumbling along the dusty road, and then the rush
of the old father, his garments fluttering, and his voice heard in
broken cries.  I see and hear it all now, whenever the words are
read.

He announced the hymn, 'Just as I am,' read the first verse, and
then went on: 'There you are, men, every man of you, somewhere on
the road.  Some of you are too lazy'--here Graeme nudged me--'and
some of you haven't got enough yet of the far country to come back.
May there be a chance for you when you want to come!  Men, you all
want to go back home, and when you go you'll want to put on your
soft clothes, and you won't go till you can go in good style; but
where did the prodigal get his good clothes?'  Quick came the
answer in Baptiste's shrill voice--

'From de old fadder!'

No one was surprised, and the minister went on--

'Yes! and that's where we must get the good, clean heart, the good,
clean, brave heart, from our Father.  Don't wait, but, just as you
are, come.  Sing.'

They sang, not loud, as they would 'Stand Up,' or even 'The Sweet
By and By,' but in voices subdued, holding down the power in them.

After the singing, Craig stood a moment gazing down at the men, and
then said quietly--

'Any man want to come?  You all might come.  We all must come.'
Then, sweeping his arm over the audience, and turning half round as
if to move off, he cried, in a voice that thrilled to the heart's
core--

'Oh! come on!  Let's go back!'

The effect was overpowering.  It seemed to me that the whole
company half rose to their feet.  Of the prayer that immediately
followed, I only caught the opening sentence, 'Father, we are
coming back,' for my attention was suddenly absorbed by Abe, the
stage-driver, who was sitting next me.  I could hear him swearing
approval and admiration, saying to himself--

'Ain't he a clinker!  I'll be gee-whizzly-gol-dusted if he ain't a
malleable-iron-double-back-action self-adjusting corn-cracker.'
And the prayer continued to be punctuated with like admiring and
even more sulphurous expletives.  It was an incongruous medley.
The earnest, reverent prayer, and the earnest, admiring profanity,
rendered chaotic one's ideas of religious propriety.  The feelings
in both were akin; the method of expression somewhat widely
diverse.

After prayer, Craig's tone changed utterly.  In a quiet, matter-of-
fact, businesslike way he stated his plan of organisation, and
called for all who wished to join to remain after the benediction.
Some fifty men were left, among them Nelson, Sandy, Lachlan
Campbell, Baptiste, Shaw, Nixon, Geordie, and Billy Breen, who
tried to get out, but was held fast by Geordie.

Graeme was passing out, but I signed him to remain, saying that I
wished 'to see the thing out.'  Abe sat still beside me, swearing
disgustedly at the fellows 'who were going back on the preacher.'
Craig appeared amazed at the number of men remaining, and seemed to
fear that something was wrong.  He put before them the terms of
discipleship, as the Master put them to the eager scribe, and he
did not make them easy.  He pictured the kind of work to be done,
and the kind of men needed for the doing of it.  Abe grew uneasy as
the minister went on to describe the completeness of the surrender,
the intensity of the loyalty demanded.

'That knocks me out, I reckon,' he muttered, in a disappointed
tone; 'I ain't up to that grade.'  And as Craig described the
heroism called for, the magnificence of the fight, the worth of it,
and the outcome of it all, Abe ground out: I'll be blanked if I
wouldn't like to take a hand, but I guess I'm not in it.'  Craig
finished by saying--

'I want to put this quite fairly.  It is not any league of mine;
you're not joining my company; it is no easy business, and it is
for your whole life.  What do you say?  Do I put it fairly?  What
do you say, Nelson?'

Nelson rose slowly, and with difficulty began--

'I may be all wrong, but you made it easier for me, Mr. Craig.  You
said He would see me through, or I should never have risked it.
Perhaps I am wrong,' and the old man looked troubled.  Craig sprang
up.

'No! no!  Thank God, no!  He will see every man through who will
trust his life to Him.  Every man, no matter how tough he is, no
matter how broken.'

Then Nelson straightened himself up and said--

'Well, sir! I believe a lot of the men would go in for this if they
were dead sure they would get through.'

'Get through!' said Craig; 'never a fear of it.  It is a hard
fight, a long fight, a glorious fight,' throwing up his head, but
every man who squarely trusts Him, and takes Him as Lord and
Master, comes out victor!'

'Bon!' said Baptiste 'Das me.  You tink He's take me in dat fight,
M'sieu Craig, heh?'  His eyes were blazing.

'You mean it?' asked Craig almost sternly.

'Yes! by gar!' said the little Frenchman eagerly.

'Hear what He says, then'; and Craig, turning over the leaves of
his Testament, read solemnly the words, 'Swear not at all.'

'Non!  For sure!  Den I stop him,' replied Baptiste earnestly; and
Craig wrote his name down.

Poor Abe looked amazed and distressed, rose slowly, and saying,
'That jars my whisky jug,' passed out.  There was a slight movement
near the organ, and glancing up I saw Mrs. Mavor put her face
hastily in her hands.  The men's faces were anxious and troubled,
and Nelson said in a voice that broke--

'Tell them what you told me, sir.'  But Craig was troubled too, and
replied, 'You tell them, Nelson!' and Nelson told the men the story
of how he began just five weeks ago.  The old man's voice steadied
as he went on, and he grew eager as he told how he had been helped,
and how the world was all different, and his heart seemed new.  He
spoke of his Friend as if He were some one that could be seen out
at camp, that he knew well, and met every day.

But as he tried to say how deeply he regretted that he had not
known all this years before, the old, hard face began to quiver,
and the steady voice wavered.  Then he pulled himself together, and
said--

'I begin to feel sure He'll pull me through--me! the hardest man in
the mountains!  So don't you fear, boys.  He's all right.'

Then the men gave in their names, one by one.  When it came to
Geordie's turn, he gave his name--

'George Crawford, frae the pairish o' Kilsyth, Scotland, an' ye'll
juist pit doon the lad's name, Maister Craig; he's a wee bit fashed
wi' the discoorse, but he has the root o' the maitter in him, I
doot.'  And so Billy Breen's name went down.

When the meeting was over, thirty-eight names stood upon the
communion roll of the Black Rock Presbyterian Church; and it will
ever be one of the regrets of my life that neither Graeme's name
nor my own appeared on that roll.  And two days after, when the cup
went round on that first Communion Sabbath, from Nelson to Sandy,
and from Sandy to Baptiste, and so on down the line to Billy Breen
and Mrs. Mavor, and then to Abe, the driver, whom she had by her
own mystic power lifted into hope and faith, I felt all the shame
and pain of a traitor; and I believe, in my heart that the fire of
that pain and shame burned something of the selfish cowardice out
of me, and that it is burning still.

The last words of the minister, in the short address after the
table had been served, were low, and sweet, and tender, but they
were words of high courage; and before he had spoken them all, the
men were listening with shining eyes, and when they rose to sing
the closing hymn they stood straight and stiff like soldiers on
parade.

And I wished more than ever I were one of them.


CHAPTER VIII

THE BREAKING OF THE LEAGUE


There is no doubt in my mind that nature designed me for a great
painter.  A railway director interfered with that design of nature,
as he has with many another of hers, and by the transmission of an
order for mountain pieces by the dozen, together with a cheque so
large that I feared there was some mistake, he determined me to be
an illustrator and designer for railway and like publications.  I
do not like these people ordering 'by the dozen.'  Why should they
not consider an artist's finer feelings?  Perhaps they cannot
understand them; but they understand my pictures, and I understand
their cheques, and there we are quits.  But so it came that I
remained in Black Rock long enough to witness the breaking of the
League.

Looking back upon the events of that night from the midst of gentle
and decent surroundings, they now seem strangely unreal, but to me
then they appeared only natural.

It was the Good Friday ball that wrecked the League.  For the fact
that the promoters of the ball determined that it should be a ball
rather than a dance was taken by the League men as a concession to
the new public opinion in favour of respectability created by the
League.  And when the manager's patronage had been secured (they
failed to get Mrs. Mavor's), and it was further announced that,
though held in the Black Rock Hotel ballroom--indeed, there was no
other place--refreshments suited to the peculiar tastes of League
men would be provided, it was felt to be almost a necessity that
the League should approve, should indeed welcome, this concession
to the public opinion in favour of respectability created by the
League.

There were extreme men on both sides, of course.  'Idaho' Jack,
professional gambler, for instance, frankly considered that the
whole town was going to unmentionable depths of propriety.  The
organisation of the League was regarded by him, and by many others,
as a sad retrograde towards the bondage of the ancient and dying
East; and that he could not get drunk when and where he pleased,
'Idaho,' as he was called, regarded as a personal grievance.

But Idaho was never enamoured of the social ways of Black Rock.  He
was shocked and disgusted when he discovered that a 'gun' was
decreed by British law to be an unnecessary adornment of a card-
table.  The manner of his discovery must have been interesting to
behold.

It is said that Idaho was industriously pursuing his avocation in
Slavin's, with his 'gun' lying upon the card-table convenient to
his hand, when in walked policeman Jackson, her Majesty's sole
representative in the Black Rock district.  Jackson, 'Stonewall'
Jackson, or 'Stonewall,' as he was called for obvious reasons,
after watching the game for a few moments, gently tapped the pistol
and asked what he used this for.

'I'll show you in two holy minutes if you don't light out,' said
Idaho, hardly looking up, but very angrily, for the luck was
against him.  But Jackson tapped upon the table and said sweetly--

'You're a stranger here.  You ought to get a guide-book and post
yourself.  Now, the boys know I don't interfere with an innocent
little game, but there is a regulation against playing it with
guns; so,' he added even more sweetly, but fastening Idaho with a
look from his steel-grey eyes, 'I'll just take charge of this,'
picking up the revolver; 'it might go off.'

Idaho's rage, great as it was, was quite swallowed up in his amazed
disgust at the state of society that would permit such an outrage
upon personal liberty.  He was quite unable to play any more that
evening, and it took several drinks all round to restore him to
articulate speech.  The rest of the night was spent in retailing
for his instruction stories of the ways of Stonewall Jackson.

Idaho bought a new 'gun,' but he wore it 'in his clothes,' and used
it chiefly in the pastime of shooting out the lights or in picking
off the heels from the boys' boots while a stag dance was in
progress in Slavin's.  But in Stonewall's presence Idaho was a most
correct citizen.  Stonewall he could understand and appreciate.  He
was six feet three, and had an eye of unpleasant penetration.  But
this new feeling in the community for respectability he could
neither understand nor endure.  The League became the object of his
indignant aversion, and the League men of his contempt.  He had
many sympathisers, and frequent were the assaults upon the newly-
born sobriety of Billy Breen and others of the League.  But
Geordie's watchful care and Mrs. Mavor's steady influence, together
with the loyal co-operation of the League men, kept Billy safe so
far.  Nixon, too, was a marked man.  It may be that he carried
himself with unnecessary jauntiness toward Slavin and Idaho,
saluting the former with, 'Awful dry weather! eh, Slavin?' and the
latter with, 'Hello, old sport! how's times?' causing them to swear
deeply; and, as it turned out, to do more than swear.

But on the whole the anti-League men were in favour of a respectable
ball, and most of the League men determined to show their
appreciation of the concession of the committee to the principles of
the League in the important matter of refreshments by attending in
force.

Nixon would not go.  However jauntily he might talk, he could not
trust himself, as he said, where whisky was flowing, for it got
into his nose 'like a fish-hook into a salmon.'  He was from
Nova Scotia.  For like reason, Vernon Winton, the young Oxford
fellow, would not go.  When they chaffed, his lips grew a little
thinner, and the colour deepened in his handsome face, but he went
on his way.  Geordie despised the 'hale hypothick' as a 'daft
ploy,' and the spending of five dollars upon a ticket he considered
a 'sinfu' waste o' guid siller'; and he warned Billy against
'coontenancin' ony sic redeeklus nonsense.'

But no one expected Billy to go; although the last two months he
had done wonders for his personal appearance, and for his position
in the social scale as well.  They all knew what a fight he was
making, and esteemed him accordingly.  How well I remember the
pleased pride in his face when he told me in the afternoon of the
committee's urgent request that he should join the orchestra with
his 'cello!  It was not simply that his 'cello was his joy and
pride, but he felt it to be a recognition of his return to
respectability.

I have often wondered how things combine at times to a man's
destruction.

Had Mr. Craig not been away at the Landing that week, had Geordie
not been on the night-shift, had Mrs. Mavor not been so occupied
with the care of her sick child, it may be Billy might have been
saved his fall.

The anticipation of the ball stirred Black Rock and the camps with
a thrill of expectant delight.  Nowadays, when I find myself forced
to leave my quiet smoke in my studio after dinner at the call of
some social engagement which I have failed to elude, I groan at my
hard lot, and I wonder as I look back and remember the pleasurable
anticipation with which I viewed the approaching ball.  But I do
not wonder now any more than I did then at the eager delight of the
men who for seven days in the week swung their picks up in the dark
breasts of the mines, or who chopped and sawed among the solitary
silences of the great forests.  Any break in the long and weary
monotony was welcome; what mattered the cost or consequence!  To
the rudest and least cultured of them the sameness of the life must
have been hard to bear; but what it was to men who had seen life in
its most cultured and attractive forms I fail to imagine.  From the
mine, black and foul, to the shack, bare, cheerless, and sometimes
hideously repulsive, life swung in heart-grinding monotony till the
longing for a 'big drink' or some other 'big break' became too
great to bear.

It was well on towards evening when Sandy's four horse team, with a
load of men from the woods, came swinging round the curves of the
mountain-road and down the street.  A gay crowd they were with
their bright, brown faces and hearty voices; and in ten minutes the
whole street seemed alive with lumbermen--they had a faculty of
spreading themselves so.  After night fell the miners came down
'done up slick,' for this was a great occasion, and they must be up
to it.  The manager appeared in evening dress; but this was voted
'too giddy' by the majority.

As Graeme and I passed up to the Black Rock Hotel, in the large
store-room of which the ball was to be held, we met old man Nelson
looking very grave.

'Going, Nelson, aren't you?' I said.

'Yes,' he answered slowly; 'I'll drop in, though I don't like the
look of things much.'

'What's the matter, Nelson?' asked Graeme cheerily.  'There's no
funeral on.'

'Perhaps not,' replied Nelson, 'but I wish Mr. Craig were home.'
And then he added, 'There's Idaho and Slavin together, and you may
bet the devil isn't far off.'

But Graeme laughed at his suspicion, and we passed on.  The
orchestra was tuning up.  There were two violins, a concertina, and
the 'cello.  Billy Breen was lovingly fingering his instrument, now
and then indulging himself in a little snatch of some air that came
to him out of his happier past.  He looked perfectly delighted, and
as I paused to listen he gave me a proud glance out of his deep,
little, blue eyes, and went on playing softly to himself.
Presently Shaw came along.

'That's good, Billy,' he called out.  'You've got the trick yet, I
see."

But Billy only nodded and went on playing.

'Where's Nixon?' I asked.

'Gone to bed,' said Shaw, 'and I am glad of it.  He finds that the
safest place on pay-day afternoon.  The boys don't bother him
there.'

The dancing-room was lined on two sides with beer-barrels and
whisky-kegs; at one end the orchestra sat, at the other was a table
with refreshments, where the 'soft drinks' might be had.  Those who
wanted anything else might pass through a short passage into the
bar just behind.

This was evidently a superior kind of ball, for the men kept on
their coats, and went through the various figures with faces of
unnatural solemnity.  But the strain upon their feelings was quite
apparent, and it became a question how long it could be maintained.
As the trips through the passage-way became more frequent the
dancing grew in vigour and hilarity, until by the time supper was
announced the stiffness had sufficiently vanished to give no
further anxiety to the committee.

But the committee had other cause for concern, inasmuch as after
supper certain of the miners appeared with their coats off, and
proceeded to 'knock the knots out of the floor' in break-down
dances of extraordinary energy.  These, however, were beguiled into
the bar-room and 'filled up' for safety, for the committee were
determined that the respectability of the ball should be preserved
to the end.  Their reputation was at stake, not in Black Rock only,
but at the Landing as well, from which most of the ladies had come;
and to be shamed in the presence of the Landing people could not be
borne.  Their difficulties seemed to be increasing, for at this
point something seemed to go wrong with the orchestra.  The 'cello
appeared to be wandering aimlessly up and down the scale,
occasionally picking up the tune with animation, and then dropping
it.  As Billy saw me approaching, he drew himself up with great
solemnity, gravely winked at me, and said--

'Shlipped a cog, Mishter Connor!  Mosh hunfortunate!  Beauchiful
hinstrument, but shlips a cog.  Mosh hunfortunate!'

And he wagged his little head sagely, playing all the while for
dear life, now second and now lead.

Poor Billy!  I pitied him, but I thought chiefly of the beautiful,
eager face that leaned towards him the night the League was made,
and of the bright voice that said, 'You'll sign with me, Billy?'
and it seemed to me a cruel deed to make him lose his grip of life
and hope; for this is what the pledge meant to him.

While I was trying to get Billy away to some safe place, I heard a
great shouting in the direction of the bar, followed by trampling
and scuffling of feet in the passage-way.  Suddenly a man burst
through, crying--

'Let me go!  Stand back!  I know what I'm about!'

It was Nixon, dressed in his best; black clothes, blue shirt, red
tie, looking handsome enough, but half-drunk and wildly excited.
The highland Fling competition was on at the moment, and Angus
Campbell, Lachlan's brother, was representing the lumber camps in
the contest.  Nixon looked on approvingly for a few moments, then
with a quick movement he seized the little Highlander, swung him in
his powerful arms clean off the floor, and deposited him gently
upon a beer-barrel.  Then he stepped into the centre of the room,
bowed to the judges, and began a sailor's hornpipe.

The committee were perplexed, but after deliberation they decided
to humour the new competitor, especially as they knew that Nixon
with whisky in him was unpleasant to cross.

Lightly and gracefully he went through his steps, the men crowding
in from the bar to admire, for Nixon was famed for his hornpipe.
But when, after the hornpipe, he proceeded to execute a clog-dance,
garnished with acrobatic feats, the committee interfered.  There
were cries of 'Put him out!' and 'Let him alone!  Go on, Nixon!'
And Nixon hurled back into the crowd two of the committee who had
laid remonstrating hands upon him, and, standing in the open
centre, cried out scornfully--

'Put me out!  Put me out!  Certainly!  Help yourselves!  Don't mind
me!'  Then grinding his teeth, so that I heard them across the
room, he added with savage deliberation, 'If any man lays a finger
on me, I'll--I'll eat his liver cold.'

He stood for a few moments glaring round upon the company, and then
strode toward the bar, followed by the crowd wildly yelling.  The
ball was forthwith broken up.  I looked around for Billy, but he
was nowhere to be seen.  Graeme touched my arm--

'There's going to be something of a time, so just keep your eyes
skinned.'

'What are you going to do?' I asked.

'Do?  Keep myself beautifully out of trouble,' he replied.

In a few moments the crowd came surging back headed by Nixon, who
was waving a whisky-bottle over his head and yelling as one
possessed.

'Hello!' exclaimed Graeme softly, 'I begin to see.  Look there!'

'What's up?' I asked.

'You see Idaho and Slavin and their pets,' he replied.

'They've got poor Nixon in tow.  Idaho is rather nasty,' he added,
'but I think I'll take a hand in this game; I've seen some of
Idaho's work before.'

The scene was one quite strange to me, and was wild beyond
description.  A hundred men filled the room.  Bottles were passed
from hand to hand, and men drank their fill.  Behind the
refreshment-tables stood the hotelman and his barkeeper with their
coats off and sleeves rolled up to the shoulder, passing out
bottles, and drawing beer and whisky from two kegs hoisted up for
that purpose.  Nixon was in his glory.  It was his night.  Every
man was to get drunk at his expense, he proclaimed, flinging down
bills upon the table.  Near him were some League men he was
treating liberally, and never far away were Idaho and Slavin
passing bottles, but evidently drinking little.

I followed Graeme, not feeling too comfortable, for this sort of
thing was new to me, but admiring the cool assurance with which he
made his way through the crowd that swayed and yelled and swore and
laughed in a most disconcerting manner.

'Hello!' shouted Nixon as he caught sight of Graeme.  'Here you
are!' passing him a bottle.  'You're a knocker, a double-handed
front door knocker.  You polished off old whisky-soak here, old
demijohn,' pointing to Slavin, 'and I'll lay five to one we can
lick any blankety blank thieves in the crowd,' and he held up a
roll of bills.

But Graeme proposed that he should give the hornpipe again, and the
floor was cleared at once, for Nixon's hornpipe was very popular,
and tonight, of course, was in high favour.  In the midst of his
dance Nixon stopped short, his arms dropped to his side, his face
had a look of fear, of horror.

There, before him, in his riding-cloak and boots, with his whip in
his hand as he had come from his ride, stood Mr. Craig.  His face
was pallid, and his dark eyes were blazing with fierce light.  As
Nixon stopped, Craig stepped forward to him, and sweeping his eyes
round upon the circle he said in tones intense with scorn--

'You cowards!  You get a man where he's weak!  Cowards! you'd damn
his soul for his money!'

There was dead silence, and Craig, lifting his hat, said solemnly--

'May God forgive you this night's work!'

Then, turning to Nixon, and throwing his arm over his shoulder, he
said in a voice broken and husky--

'Come on, Nixon! we'll go!'

Idaho made a motion as if to stop him, but Graeme stepped quickly
foreword and said sharply, 'Make way there, can't you?' and the
crowd fell back and we four passed through, Nixon walking as in a
dream, with Craig's arm about him.  Down the street we went in
silence, and on to Craig's shack, where we found old man Nelson,
with the fire blazing, and strong coffee steaming on the stove.  It
was he that had told Craig, on his arrival from the Landing, of
Nixon's fall.

There was nothing of reproach, but only gentlest pity, in tone and
touch as Craig placed the half-drunk, dazed man in his easy-chair,
took off his boots, brought him his own slippers, and gave him
coffee.  Then, as his stupor began to overcome him, Craig put him
in his own bed, and came forth with a face written over with grief.

'Don't mind, old chap,' said Graeme kindly.

But Craig looked at him without a word, and, throwing himself into
a chair, put his face in his hands.  As we sat there in silence the
door was suddenly pushed open and in walked Abe Baker with the
words, 'Where is Nixon?' and we told him where he was.  We were
still talking when again a tap came to the door, and Shaw came in
looking much disturbed.

'Did you hear about Nixon?' he asked.  We told him what we knew.

'But did you hear how they got him?' he asked, excitedly.

As he told us the tale, the men stood listening, with faces growing
hard.

It appeared that after the making of the League the Black Rock
Hotel man had bet Idaho one hundred to fifty that Nixon could not
be got to drink before Easter.  All Idaho's schemes had failed, and
now he had only three days in which to win his money, and the ball
was his last chance.  Here again he was balked, for Nixon,
resisting all entreaties, barred his shack door and went to bed
before nightfall, according to his invariable custom on pay-days.
At midnight some of Idaho's men came battering at the door for
admission, which Nixon reluctantly granted.  For half an hour they
used every art of persuasion to induce him to go down to the ball,
the glorious success of which was glowingly depicted; but Nixon
remained immovable, and they took their departure, baffled and
cursing.  In two hours they returned drunk enough to be dangerous,
kicked at the door in vain, finally gained entrance through the
window, hauled Nixon out of bed, and, holding a glass of whisky to
his lips, bade him drink.  But he knocked the glass sway, spilling
the liquor over himself and the bed.

It was drink or fight, and Nixon was ready to fight; but after
parley they had a drink all round, and fell to persuasion again.
The night was cold, and poor Nixon sat shivering on the edge of his
bed.  If he would take one drink they would leave him alone.  He
need not show himself so stiff.  The whisky fumes filled his
nostrils.  If one drink would get them off, surely that was better
than fighting and killing some one or getting killed.  He
hesitated, yielded, drank his glass.  They sat about him amiably
drinking, and lauding him as a fine fellow after all.  One more
glass before they left.  Then Nixon rose, dressed himself, drank
all that was left of the bottle, put his money in his pocket, and
came down to the dance, wild with his old-time madness, reckless of
faith and pledge, forgetful of home, wife, babies, his whole being
absorbed in one great passion--to drink and drink and drink till he
could drink no more.

Before Shaw had finished his tale, Craig's eyes were streaming with
tears, and groans of rage and pity broke alternately from him.  Abe
remained speechless for a time, not trusting himself; but as he
heard Craig groan, 'Oh, the beasts! the fiends!' he seemed
encouraged to let himself loose, and he began swearing with the
coolest and most blood-curdling deliberation.  Craig listened with
evident approval, apparently finding complete satisfaction in Abe's
performance, when suddenly he seemed to waken up, caught Abe by the
arm, and said in a horror-stricken voice--

'Stop! stop!  God forgive us! we must not swear like this.'

Abe stopped at once, and in a surprised and slightly grieved voice
said--

'Why! what's the matter with that?  Ain't that what you wanted?'

'Yes! yes!  God forgive me!  I am afraid it was,' he answered
hurriedly; 'but I must not.'

'Oh, don't you worry,' went on Abe cheerfully; 'I'll look after
that part; and anyway, ain't they the blankest blankety blank'--
going off again into a roll of curses, till Craig, in an agony of
entreaty, succeeded in arresting the flow of profanity possible to
no one but a mountain stage-driver.  Abe paused looking hurt, and
asked if they did not deserve everything he was calling down upon
them.

'Yes, yes,' urged Craig; 'but that is not our business.'

'Well! so I reckoned,' replied Abe, recognising the limitations of
the cloth; 'you ain't used to it, and you can't be expected to do
it; but it just makes me feel good--let out o' school like--to
properly do 'em up, the blank, blank,' and off he went again.  It
was only under the pressure of Mr. Craig's prayers and commands
that he finally agreed 'to hold in, though it was tough.'

'What's to be done?' asked Shaw.

'Nothing,' answered Craig bitterly.  He was exhausted with his long
ride from the Landing, and broken with bitter disappointment over
the ruin of all that he had laboured so long to accomplish.

'Nonsense,' said Graeme; 'there's a good deal to do.'

It was agreed that Craig should remain with Nixon while the others
of us should gather up what fragments we could find of the broken
League.  We had just opened the door, when we met a man striding up
at a great pace.  It was Geordie Crawford.

'Hae ye seen the lad?' was his salutation.  No one replied.  So I
told Geordie of my last sight of Billy in the orchestra.

'An' did ye no' gang aifter him?' he asked in indignant surprise,
adding with some contempt, 'Man! but ye're a feckless buddie.'

'Billy gone too!' said Shaw.  'They might have let Billy alone.'

Poor Craig stood in a dumb agony.  Billy's fall seemed more than he
could bear.  We went out, leaving him heart-broken amid the ruins
of his League.


CHAPTER IX

THE LEAGUE'S REVENGE


As we stood outside of Craig's shack in the dim starlight, we could
not hide from ourselves that we were beaten.  It was not so much
grief as a blind fury that filled my heart, and looking at the
faces of the men about me I read the same feeling there.  But what
could we do?  The yells of carousing miners down at Slavin's told
us that nothing could be done with them that night.  To be so
utterly beaten, and unfairly, and with no chance of revenge, was
maddening.

'I'd like to get back at 'em,' said Abe, carefully repressing
himself.

'I've got it, men,' said Graeme suddenly.  'This town does not
require all the whisky there is in it'; and he unfolded his plan.
It was to gain possession of Slavin's saloon and the bar of the
Black Rock Hotel, and clear out all the liquor to be found in both
these places.  I did not much like the idea; and Geordie said, 'I'm
ga'en aifter the lad; I'll hae naethin' tae dae wi' yon.  It's' no'
that easy, an' it's a sinfu' waste.'

But Abe was wild to try it, and Shaw was quite willing, while old
Nelson sternly approved.

'Nelson, you and Shaw get a couple of our men and attend to the
saloon.  Slavin and the whole gang are up at the Black Rock, so you
won't have much trouble; but come to us as soon as you can.'

And so we went our ways.

Then followed a scene the like of which I can never hope to see
again, and it was worth a man's seeing.  But there were times that
night when I wished I had not agreed to follow Graeme in his plot.
As we went up to the hotel, I asked Graeme, 'What about the law of
this?'

'Law!' he replied indignantly.  'They haven't troubled much about
law in the whisky business here.  They get a keg of high wines and
some drugs and begin operations.  No!' he went on; 'if we can get
the crowd out, and ourselves in, we'll make them break the law in
getting us out.  The law won't trouble us over smuggled whisky.
It will be a great lark, and they won't crow too loud over the
League.'

I did not like the undertaking at first; but as I thought of the
whole wretched illegal business flourishing upon the weakness of
the men in the mines and camps, whom I had learned to regard as
brothers, and especially as I thought of the cowards that did for
Nixon, I let my scruples go, and determined, with Abe, 'to get back
at 'em.'

We had no difficulty getting them out.  Abe began to yell.  Some
men rushed out to learn the cause.  He seized the foremost man,
making a hideous uproar all the while, and in three minutes had
every man out of the hotel and a lively row going on.

In two minutes more Graeme and I had the door to the ball-room
locked and barricaded with empty casks.  We then closed the door of
the bar-room leading to the outside.  The bar-room was a strongly
built log-shack, with a heavy door secured, after the manner of the
early cabins, with two strong oak bars, so that we felt safe from
attack from that quarter.

The ball-room we could not hold long, for the door was slight and
entrance was possible through the windows.  But as only a few casks
of liquor were left there, our main work would be in the bar, so
that the fight would be to hold the passage-way.  This we
barricaded with casks and tables.  But by this time the crowd had
begun to realise what had happened, and were wildly yelling at door
and windows.  With an axe which Graeme had brought with him the
casks were soon stove in, and left to empty themselves.

As I was about to empty the last cask, Graeme stopped me, saying,
'Let that stand here.  It will help us.'  And so it did.  'Now skip
for the barricade,' yelled Graeme, as a man came crashing through
the window.  Before he could regain his feet, however, Graeme had
seized him and flung him out upon the heads of the crowd outside.
But through the other windows men were coming in, and Graeme rushed
for the barricade, followed by two of the enemy, the foremost of
whom I received at the top and hurled back upon the others.

'Now, be quick!' said Graeme; 'I'll hold this.  Don't break any
bottles on the floor--throw them out there,' pointing to a little
window high up in the wall.

I made all haste.  The casks did not take much time, and soon the
whisky and beer were flowing over the floor.  It made me think of
Geordie's regret over the 'sinfu' waste.'  The bottles took longer,
and glancing up now and then I saw that Graeme was being hard
pressed.  Men would leap, two and three at a time, upon the
barricade, and Graeme's arms would shoot out, and over they would
topple upon the heads of those nearest.  It was a great sight to
see him standing alone with a smile on his face and the light of
battle in his eye, coolly meeting his assailants with those
terrific, lightning-like blows.  In fifteen minutes my work was
done.

'What next?' I asked.  'How do we get out?'

'How is the door?' he replied.

I looked through the port-hole and said, 'A crowd of men waiting.'

'We'll have to make a dash for it, I fancy,' he replied cheerfully,
though his face was covered with blood and his breath was coming in
short gasps.

'Get down the bars and be ready.'  But even as he spoke a chair
hurled from below caught him on the arm, and before he could
recover, a man had cleared the barricade and was upon him like a
tiger.  It was Idaho Jack.

'Hold the barricade,' Graeme called out, as they both went down.

I sprang to his place, but I had not much hope of holding it long.
I had the heavy oak bar of the door in my hands, and swinging it
round my head I made the crowd give back for a few moments.

Meantime Graeme had shaken off his enemy, who was circling about
him upon his tip-toes, with a long knife in his hand, waiting for a
chance to spring.

'I have been waiting for this for some time, Mr. Graeme,' he said
smiling.

'Yes,' replied Graeme, 'ever since I spoiled your cut-throat game
in 'Frisco.  How is the little one?' he added sarcastically.

Idaho's face lost its smile and became distorted with fury as he
replied, spitting out his words, 'She--is--where you will be before
I am done with you.'

'Ah! you murdered her too!  You'll hang some beautiful day, Idaho,'
said Graeme, as Idaho sprang upon him.

Graeme dodged his blow and caught his forearm with his left hand
and held up high the murderous knife.  Back and forward they swayed
over the floor, slippery with whisky, the knife held high in the
air.  I wondered why Graeme did not strike, and then I saw his
right hand hung limp from the wrist.  The men were crowding upon
the barricade.  I was in despair.  Graeme's strength was going
fast.  With a yell of exultant fury Idaho threw himself with all
his weight upon Graeme, who could only cling to him.  They swayed
together towards me, but as they fell I brought down my bar upon
the upraised hand and sent the knife flying across the room.
Idaho's howl of rage and pain was mingled with a shout from below,
and there, dashing the crowd right and left, came old Nelson,
followed by Abe, Sandy, Baptiste, Shaw, and others.  As they
reached the barricade it crashed down and, carrying me with it,
pinned me fast.

Looking out between the barrels, I saw what froze my heart with
horror.  In the fall Graeme had wound his arms about his enemy and
held him in a grip so deadly that he could not strike; but Graeme's
strength was failing, and when I looked I saw that Idaho was slowly
dragging both across the slippery floor to where the knife lay.
Nearer and nearer his outstretched fingers came to the knife.  In
vain I yelled and struggled.  My voice was lost in the awful din,
and the barricade held me fast.  Above me, standing on a barrel-
head, was Baptiste, yelling like a demon.  In vain I called to him.
My fingers could just reach his foot, and he heeded not at all my
touch.  Slowly Idaho was dragging his almost unconscious victim
toward the knife.  His fingers were touching the blade point, when,
under a sudden inspiration, I pulled out my penknife, opened it
with my teeth, and drove the blade into Baptiste's foot.  With a
blood-curdling yell he sprang down and began dancing round in his
rage, peering among the barrels.

'Look! look!' I was calling in agony, and pointing; 'for heaven's
sake, look! Baptiste!'

The fingers had closed upon the knife, the knife was already high
in the air, when, with a shriek, Baptiste cleared the room at a
bound, and, before the knife could fall, the little Frenchman's
boot had caught the uplifted wrist, and sent the knife flying to
the wall.

Then there was a great rushing sound as of wind through the forest,
and the lights went out.  When I awoke, I found myself lying with
my head on Graeme's knees, and Baptiste sprinkling snow on my face.
As I looked up Graeme leaned over me, and, smiling down into my
eyes, he said--

'Good boy!  It was a great fight, and we put it up well'; and then
he whispered, 'I owe you my life, my boy.'

His words thrilled my heart through and through, for I loved him as
only men can love men; but I only answered--

'I could not keep them back.'

'It was well done,' he said; and I felt proud.  I confess I was
thankful to be so well out of it, for Graeme got off with a bone in
his wrist broken, and I with a couple of ribs cracked; but had it
not been for the open barrel of whisky which kept them occupied for
a time, offering too good a chance to be lost, and for the timely
arrival of Nelson, neither of us had ever seen the light again.

We found Craig sound asleep upon his couch.  His consternation on
waking to see us torn, bruised, and bloody was laughable; but he
hastened to find us warm water and bandages, and we soon felt
comfortable.

Baptiste was radiant with pride and light over the fight, and
hovered about Graeme and me giving vent to his feelings in admiring
French and English expletives.  But Abe was disgusted because of
the failure at Slavin's; for when Nelson looked in, he saw Slavin's
French-Canadian wife in charge, with her baby on her lap, and he
came back to Shaw and said, 'Come away, we can't touch this'; and
Shaw, after looking in, agreed that nothing could be done.  A baby
held the fort.

As Craig listened to the account of the fight, he tried hard not to
approve, but he could not keep the gleam out of his eyes; and as I
pictured Graeme dashing back the crowd thronging the barricade till
he was brought down by the chair, Craig laughed gently, and put his
hand on Graeme's knee.  And as I went on to describe my agony while
Idaho's fingers were gradually nearing the knife, his face grew
pale and his eyes grew wide with horror.

'Baptiste here did the business,' I said, and the little Frenchman
nodded complacently and said--

'Dat's me for sure.'

'By the way, how is your foot?' asked Graeme.

'He's fuss-rate.  Dat's what you call--one bite of--of--dat leel
bees, he's dere, you put your finger dere, he's not dere!--what you
call him?'

'Flea!' I suggested.

'Oui!' cried Baptiste.  'Dat's one bite of flea.'

'I was thankful I was under the barrels,' I replied, smiling.

'Oui!  Dat's mak' me ver mad.  I jump an' swear mos' awful bad.
Dat's pardon me, M'sieu Craig, heh?'

But Craig only smiled at him rather sadly.  'It was awfully risky,'
he said to Graeme, 'and it was hardly worth it.  They'll get more
whisky, and anyway the League is gone.'

'Well,' said Graeme with a sigh of satisfaction, 'it is not quite
such a one-sided affair as it was.'

And we could say nothing in reply, for we could hear Nixon snoring
in the next room, and no one had heard of Billy, and there were
others of the League that we knew were even now down at Slavin's.
It was thought best that all should remain in Mr. Craig's shack, not
knowing what might happen; and so we lay where we could and we
needed none to sing us to sleep.

When I awoke, stiff and sore, it was to find breakfast ready and
old man Nelson in charge.  As we were seated, Craig came in, and I
saw that he was not the man of the night before.  His courage had
come back, his face was quiet and his eye clear; he was his own man
again.

'Geordie has been out all night, but has failed to find Billy,' he
announced quietly.

We did not talk much; Graeme and I worried with our broken bones,
and the others suffered from a general morning depression.  But,
after breakfast, as the men were beginning to move, Craig took down
his Bible, and saying--

'Wait a few minutes, men!' he read slowly, in his beautiful clear
voice, that psalm for all fighters--


     'God is our refuge and strength,'


and soon to the noble words--


     'The Lord of Hosts is with us;
      The God of Jacob is our refuge.'


How the mighty words pulled us together, lifted us till we grew
ashamed of our ignoble rage and of our ignoble depression!

And then Craig prayed in simple, straight-going words.  There was
acknowledgement of failure, but I knew he was thinking chiefly of
himself; and there was gratitude, and that was for the men about
him, and I felt my face burn with shame; and there was petition for
help, and we all thought of Nixon, and Billy, and the men wakening
from their debauch at Slavin's this pure, bright morning.  And then
he asked that we might be made faithful and worthy of God, whose
battle it was.  Then we all stood up and shook hands with him in
silence, and every man knew a covenant was being made.  But none
saw his meeting with Nixon.  He sent us all away before that.

Nothing was heard of the destruction of the hotel stock-in-trade.
Unpleasant questions would certainly be asked, and the proprietor
decided to let bad alone.  On the point of respectability the
success of the ball was not conspicuous, but the anti-League men
were content, if not jubilant.

Billy Breen was found by Geordie late in the afternoon in his own
old and deserted shack, breathing heavily, covered up in his
filthy, mouldering bed-clothes, with a half-empty bottle of whisky
at his side.  Geordie's grief and rage were beyond even his Scotch
control.  He spoke few words, but these were of such concentrated
vehemence that no one felt the need of Abe's assistance in
vocabulary.

Poor Billy!  We carried him to Mrs. Mavor's home; put him in a warm
bath, rolled him in blankets, and gave him little sips of hot
water, then of hot milk and coffee; as I had seen a clever doctor
in the hospital treat a similar case of nerve and heart depression.
But the already weakened system could not recover from the awful
shock of the exposure following the debauch; and on Sunday
afternoon we saw that his heart was failing fast.  All day the
miners had been dropping in to inquire after him, for Billy had
been a great favourite in other days, and the attention of the town
had been admiringly centred upon his fight of these last weeks.  It
was with no ordinary sorrow that the news of his condition was
received.  As Mrs. Mavor sang to him, his large coarse hands moved
in time to the music, but he did not open his eyes till he heard
Mr. Craig's voice in the next room; then he spoke his name, and Mr.
Craig was kneeling beside him in a moment.  The words came slowly--

'Oi tried--to fight it hout--but---oi got beaten.  Hit 'urts to
think 'E's hashamed o' me.  Oi'd like t'a done better--oi would.'

'Ashamed of you, Billy!' said Craig, in a voice that broke.  'Not
He.'

'An'--ye hall--'elped me so!' he went on.  'Oi wish oi'd 'a done
better--oi do,' and his eyes sought Geordie, and then rested on
Mrs. Mavor, who smiled back at him with a world of love in her
eyes.

'You hain't hashamed o' me--yore heyes saigh so,' he said looking
at her.

'No, Billy,' she said, and I wondered at her steady voice, 'not a
bit.  Why, Billy, I am proud of you.'

He gazed up at her with wonder and ineffable love in his little
eyes, then lifted his hand slightly toward her.  She knelt quickly
and took it in both of hers, stroking it and kissing it.

'Oi haught t'a done better.  Oi'm hawful sorry oi went back on 'Im.
Hit was the lemonaide.  The boys didn't mean no 'arm--but hit
started the 'ell hinside.'

Geordie hurled out some bitter words.

'Don't be 'ard on 'em, Geordie; they didn't mean no 'arm,' he said,
and his eyes kept waiting till Geordie said hurriedly--

'Na! na! lad--a'll juist leave them till the Almichty.'

Then Mrs. Mavor sang softly, smoothing his hand, 'Just as I am,'
and Billy dozed quietly for half an hour.

When he awoke again his eyes turned to Mr. Craig, and they were
troubled and anxious.

'Oi tried 'ard.  Oi wanted to win,' he struggled to say.  By this
time Craig was master of himself, and he answered in a clear,
distinct voice--

'Listen, Billy!  You made a great fight, and you are going to win
yet.  And besides, do you remember the sheep that got lost over the
mountains?'--this parable was Billy's special delight--'He didn't
beat it when He got it, did he?  He took it in His arms and carried
it home.  And so He will you.'

And Billy, keeping his eyes fastened on Mr. Craig, simply said--

'Will 'E?'

'Sure!' said Craig.

'Will 'E?' he repeated, turning his eyes upon Mrs. Mavor.

'Why, yes, Billy,' she answered cheerily, though the tears were
streaming from her eyes.  'I would, and He loves you far more.'

He looked at her, smiled, and closed his eyes.  I put my hand on
his heart; it was fluttering feebly.  Again a troubled look passed
over his face.

'My--poor--hold--mother,' he whispered, 'she's--hin--the--wukus.'

'I shall take care of her, Billy,' said Mrs. Mavor, in a clear
voice, and again Billy smiled.  Then he turned his eyes to Mr.
Craig, and from him to Geordie, and at last to Mrs. Mavor, where
they rested.  She bent over and kissed him twice on the forehead.

'Tell 'er,' he said, with difficulty, "E's took me 'ome.'

'Yes, Billy!' she cried, gazing into his glazing eyes.  He tried to
lift her hand.  She kissed him again.  He drew one deep breath and
lay quite still.

'Thank the blessed Saviour!' said Mr. Craig, reverently.  'He has
taken him home.'

But Mrs. Mavor held the dead hand tight and sobbed out passionately,
'Oh, Billy, Billy! you helped me once when I needed help!  I cannot
forget!'

And Geordie, groaning, 'Ay, laddie, laddie,' passed out into the
fading light of the early evening.

Next day no one went to work, for to all it seemed a sacred day.
They carried him into the little church, and there Mr. Craig spoke
of his long, hard fight, and of his final victory; for he died
without a fear, and with love to the men who, not knowing, had been
his death.  And there was no bitterness in any heart, for Mr. Craig
read the story of the sheep, and told how gently He had taken Billy
home; but, though no word was spoken, it was there the League was
made again.

They laid him under the pines, beside Lewis Mavor; and the miners
threw sprigs of evergreen into the open grave.  When Slavin,
sobbing bitterly, brought his sprig, no one stopped him, though all
thought it strange.

As we turned to leave the grave, the light from the evening sun
came softly through the gap in the mountains, and, filling the
valley, touched the trees and the little mound beneath with glory.
And I thought of that other glory, which is brighter than the sun,
and was not sorry that poor Billy's weary fight was over; and I
could not help agreeing with Craig that it was there the League had
its revenge.


CHAPTER X

WHAT CAME TO SLAVIN


Billy Breen's legacy to the Black Rock mining camp was a new
League, which was more than the old League re-made.  The League was
new in its spirit and in its methods.  The impression made upon the
camp by Billy Breen's death was very remarkable, and I have never
been quite able to account for it.  The mood of the community at
the time was peculiarly susceptible.  Billy was one of the oldest
of the old-timers.  His decline and fall had been a long process,
and his struggle for life and manhood was striking enough to arrest
the attention and awaken the sympathy of the whole camp.  We
instinctively side with a man in his struggle for freedom; for we
feel that freedom is native to him and to us.  The sudden collapse
of the struggle stirred the men with a deep pity for the beaten
man, and a deep contempt for those who had tricked him to his doom.
But though the pity and the contempt remained, the gloom was
relieved and the sense of defeat removed from the men's minds by
the transforming glory of Billy's last hour.  Mr. Craig, reading of
the tragedy of Billy's death, transfigured defeat into victory, and
this was generally accepted by the men as the true reading, though
to them it was full of mystery.  But they could all understand and
appreciate at full value the spirit that breathed through the words
of the dying man: 'Don't be 'ard on 'em, they didn't mean no 'arm.'
And this was the new spirit of the League.

It was this spirit that surprised Slavin into sudden tears at the
grave's side.  He had come braced for curses and vengeance, for all
knew it was he who had doctored Billy's lemonade, and instead of
vengeance the message from the dead that echoed through the voice
of the living was one of pity and forgiveness.

But the days of the League's negative, defensive warfare were over.
The fight was to the death, and now the war was to be carried into
the enemy's country.  The League men proposed a thoroughly equipped
and well-conducted coffee-room, reading-room, and hall, to parallel
the enemy's lines of operation, and defeat them with their own
weapons upon their own ground.  The main outlines of the scheme
were clearly defined and were easily seen, but the perfecting of
the details called for all Craig's tact and good sense.  When, for
instance, Vernon Winton, who had charge of the entertainment
department, came for Craig's opinion as to a minstrel troupe and
private theatricals, Craig was prompt with his answer--

'Anything clean goes.'

'A nigger show?' asked Winton.

'Depends upon the niggers,' replied Craig with a gravely comic
look, shrewdly adding, 'ask Mrs. Mavor'; and so the League Minstrel
and Dramatic Company became an established fact, and proved, as
Craig afterwards told me, 'a great means of grace to the camp.'

Shaw had charge of the social department, whose special care it was
to see that the men were made welcome to the cosy, cheerful reading
room, where they might chat, smoke, read, write, or play games,
according to fancy.

But Craig felt that the success or failure of the scheme would
largely depend upon the character of the Resident Manager, who,
while caring for reading-room and hall, would control and operate
the important department represented by the coffee-room.

'At this point the whole business may come to grief,' he said to
Mrs. Mavor, without whose counsel nothing was done.

'Why come to grief?' she asked brightly.

'Because if we don't get the right man, that's what will happen,'
he replied in a tone that spoke of anxious worry.

'But we shall get the right man, never fear.'  Her serene courage
never faltered.  'He will come to us.'

Craig turned and gazed at her in frank admiration and said--

'If I only had your courage!'

'Courage!' she answered quickly.  'It is not for you to say that';
and at his answering look the red came into her cheek and the
depths in her eyes glowed, and I marvelled and wondered, looking at
Craig's cool face, whether his blood were running evenly through
his veins.  But his voice was quiet, a shade too quiet I thought,
as he gravely replied--

'I would often be a coward but for the shame of it.'

And so the League waited for the man to come, who was to be
Resident Manager and make the new enterprise a success.  And come
he did; but the manner of his coming was so extraordinary, that I
have believed in the doctrine of a special providence ever since;
for as Craig said, 'If he had come straight from Heaven I could not
have been more surprised.'

While the League was thus waiting, its interest centred upon
Slavin, chiefly because he represented more than any other the
forces of the enemy; and though Billy Breen stood between him and
the vengeance of the angry men who would have made short work of
him and his saloon, nothing could save him from himself, and after
the funeral Slavin went to his bar and drank whisky as he had never
drunk before.  But the more he drank the fiercer and gloomier he
became, and when the men drinking with him chaffed him, he swore
deeply and with such threats that they left him alone.

It did not help Slavin either to have Nixon stride in through the
crowd drinking at his bar and give him words of warning.

'It is not your fault, Slavin,' he said in slow, cool voice, 'that
you and your precious crew didn't sent me to my death, too.  You've
won your bet, but I want to say, that next time, though you are
seven to one, or ten times that, when any of you boys offer me a
drink I'll take you to mean fight, and I'll not disappoint you, and
some one will be killed,' and so saying he strode out again,
leaving a mean-looking crowd of men behind him.  All who had not
been concerned in the business at Nixon's shack expressed approval
of his position, and hoped he would 'see it through.'

But the impression of Nixon's words upon Slavin was as nothing
compared with that made by Geordie Crawford.  It was not what he
said so much as the manner of awful solemnity he carried.  Geordie
was struggling conscientiously to keep his promise to 'not be 'ard
on the boys,' and found considerable relief in remembering that he
had agreed 'to leave them tae the Almichty.'  But the manner of
leaving them was so solemnly awful, that I could not wonder that
Slavin's superstitious Irish nature supplied him with supernatural
terrors.  It was the second day after the funeral that Geordie and
I were walking towards Slavin's.  There was a great shout of
laughter as we drew near.

Geordie stopped short, and saying, 'We'll juist gang in a meenute,'
passed through the crowd and up to the bar.

'Michael Slavin,' began Geordie, and the men stared in dead,
silence, with their glasses in their hands.  'Michael Slavin, a'
promised the lad a'd bear ye nae ill wull, but juist leave ye tae
the Almichty; an' I want tae tell ye that a'm keepin' ma wur-r-d.
But'--and here he raised his hand, and his voice became
preternaturally solemn--'his bluid is upon yer han's.  Do ye no'
see it?'

His voice rose sharply, and as he pointed, Slavin instinctively
glanced at his hands, and Geordie added--

'Ay, and the Lord will require it o' you and yer hoose.'

They told me that Slavin shivered as if taken with ague after
Geordie went out, and though he laughed and swore, he did not stop
drinking till he sank into a drunken stupor and had to be carried
to bed.  His little French-Canadian wife could not understand the
change that had come over her husband.

'He's like one bear,' she confided to Mrs. Mavor, to whom she was
showing her baby of a year old.  'He's not kees me one tam dis day.
He's mos hawful bad, he's not even look at de baby.'  And this
seemed sufficient proof that something was seriously wrong; for she
went on to say--

'He's tink more for dat leel baby dan for de whole worl'; he's tink
more for dat baby dan for me,' but she shrugged her pretty little
shoulders in deprecation of her speech.

'You must pray for him,' said Mrs. Mavor, 'and all will come
right.'

'Ah! madame!' she replied earnestly, 'every day, every day, I pray
la sainte Vierge et tous les saints for him.'

'You must pray to your Father in heaven for him.'

'Ah! oui! I weel pray,' and Mrs. Mavor sent her away bright with
smiles, and with new hope and courage in her heart.

She had very soon need of all her courage, for at the week's end
her baby fell dangerously ill.  Slavin's anxiety and fear were not
relieved much by the reports the men brought him from time to time
of Geordie's ominous forebodings; for Geordie had no doubt but that
the Avenger of Blood was hot upon Slavin's trail; and as the
sickness grew, he became confirmed in this conviction.  While he
could not be said to find satisfaction in Slavin's impending
affliction, he could hardly hide his complacency in the promptness
of Providence in vindicating his theory of retribution.

But Geordie's complacency was somewhat rudely shocked by Mr.
Craig's answer to his theory one day.

'You read your Bible to little profit, it seems to me, Geordie: or,
perhaps, you have never read the Master's teaching about the Tower
of Siloam.  Better read that and take that warning to yourself.'

Geordie gazed after Mr. Craig as he turned away, and muttered--

'The toor o' Siloam, is it?  Ay, a' ken fine aboot the toor o'
Siloam, and aboot the toor o' Babel as weel; an' a've read, too,
about the blaspheemious Herod, an' sic like.  Man, but he's a hot-
heided laddie, and lacks discreemeenation.'

'What about Herod, Geordie?' I asked.

'Aboot Herod?'--with a strong tinge of contempt in his tone.
'Aboot Herod?  Man, hae ye no' read in the Screepturs aboot Herod
an' the wur-r-ms in the wame o' him?'

'Oh yes, I see,' I hastened to answer.

'Ay, a fule can see what's flapped in his face,' with which bit of
proverbial philosophy he suddenly left me.  But Geordie thenceforth
contented himself, in Mr. Craig's presence at least, with ominous
head-shakings, equally aggravating, and impossible to answer.

That same night, however, Geordie showed that with all his theories
he had a man's true heart, for he came in haste to Mrs. Mavor to
say:

'Ye'll be needed ower yonder, a'm thinkin'.'

'Why?  Is the baby worse?  Have you been in?'

'Na, na,' replied Geordie cautiously, 'a'll no gang where a'm no
wanted.  But yon puir thing, ye can hear ootside weepin' and
moanin'.'

'She'll maybe need ye tae,' he went on dubiously to me.  'Ye're a
kind o' doctor, a' hear,' not committing himself to any opinion as
to my professional value.  But Slavin would have none of me, having
got the doctor sober enough to prescribe.

The interest of the camp in Slavin was greatly increased by the
illness of his baby, which was to him as the apple of his eye.
There were a few who, impressed by Geordie's profound convictions
upon the matter, were inclined to favour the retribution theory,
and connect the baby's illness with the vengeance of the Almighty.
Among these few was Slavin himself, and goaded by his remorseful
terrors he sought relief in drink.  But this brought him only
deeper and fiercer gloom; so that between her suffering child and
her savagely despairing husband, the poor mother was desperate with
terror and grief.

'Ah! madame,' she sobbed to Mrs. Mavor, 'my heart is broke for him.
He's heet noting for tree days, but jis dreenk, dreenk, dreenk.'

The next day a man came for me in haste.  The baby was dying and
the doctor was drunk.  I found the little one in a convulsion lying
across Mrs. Mavor's knees, the mother kneeling beside it, wringing
her hands in a dumb agony, and Slavin standing near, silent and
suffering.  I glanced at the bottle of medicine upon the table and
asked Mrs. Mavor the dose, and found the baby had been poisoned.
My look of horror told Slavin something was wrong, and striding to
me he caught my arm and asked--

'What is it?  Is the medicine wrong?'

I tried to put him off, but his grip tightened till his fingers
seemed to reach the bone.

'The dose is certainly too large; but let me go, I must do
something.'

He let me go at once, saying in a voice that made my heart sore for
him, 'He has killed my baby; he has killed my baby.'  And then he
cursed the doctor with awful curses, and with a look of such
murderous fury on his face that I was glad the doctor was too drunk
to appear.

His wife hearing his curses, and understanding the cause, broke out
into wailing hard to bear.

'Ah! mon petit ange!  It is dat wheeskey dat's keel mon baby.  Ah!
mon cheri, mon amour.  Ah! mon Dieu!  Ah, Michael, how often I say
that wheeskey he's not good ting.'

It was more than Slavin could bear, and with awful curses he passed
out.  Mrs. Mavor laid the baby in its crib, for the convulsion had
passed away; and putting her arms about the wailing little
Frenchwoman, comforted and soothed her as a mother might her
child.

'And you must help your husband,' I heard her say.  'He will need
you more than ever.  Think of him.'

'Ah oui! I weel,' was the quick reply, and from that moment there
was no more wailing.

It seemed no more than a minute till Slavin came in again, sober,
quiet, and steady; the passion was all gone from his face, and only
the grief remained.

As we stood leaning over the sleeping child the little thing opened
its eyes, saw its father, and smiled.  It was too much for him.
The big man dropped on his knees with a dry sob.

'Is there no chance at all, at all?' he whispered, but I could give
him no hope.  He immediately rose, and pulling himself together,
stood perfectly quiet.

A new terror seized upon the mother.

'My baby is not--what you call it?' going through the form of
baptism.  'An' he will not come to la sainte Vierge,' she said,
crossing herself.

'Do not fear for your little one,' said Mrs. Mavor, still with her
arms about her.  'The good Saviour will take your darling into His
own arms.'

But the mother would not be comforted by this.  And Slavin too, was
uneasy.

'Where is Father Goulet?' he asked.

'Ah! you were not good to the holy pere de las tam, Michael,' she
replied sadly.  'The saints are not please for you.'

'Where is the priest?' he demanded.

'I know not for sure.  At de Landin', dat's lak.'

'I'll go for him,' he said.  But his wife clung to him, beseeching
him not to leave her, and indeed he was loth to leave his little
one.

I found Craig and told him the difficulty.  With his usual
promptness, he was ready with a solution.

'Nixon has a team.  He will go.'  Then he added, 'I wonder if they
would not like me to baptize their little one.  Father Goulet and I
have exchanged offices before now.  I remember how he came to one
of my people in my absence, when she was dying, read with her,
prayed with her, comforted her, and helped her across the river.
He is a good soul, and has no nonsense about him.  Send for me if
you think there is need.  It will make no difference to the baby,
but it will comfort the mother.'

Nixon was willing enough to go; but when he came to the door Mrs.
Mavor saw the hard look in his face.  He had not forgotten his
wrong, for day by day he was still fighting the devil within that
Slavin had called to life.  But Mrs. Mavor, under cover of getting
him instructions, drew him into the room.  While listening to her,
his eyes wandered from one to the other of the group till they
rested upon the little white face in the crib.  She noticed the
change in his face.

'They fear the little one will never see the Saviour if it is not
baptized,' she said, in a low tone.

He was eager to go.

'I'll do my best to get the priest,' he said, and was gone on his
sixty miles' race with death.

The long afternoon wore on, but before it was half gone I saw Nixon
could not win, and that the priest would be too late, so I sent for
Mr. Craig.  From the moment he entered the room he took command of
us all.  He was so simple, so manly, so tender, the hearts of the
parents instinctively turned to him.

As he was about to proceed with the baptism, the mother whispered
to Mrs. Mavor, who hesitatingly asked Mr. Craig if he would object
to using holy water.

'To me it is the same as any other,' he replied gravely.

'An' will he make the good sign?' asked the mother timidly.

And so the child was baptized by the Presbyterian minister with
holy water and with the sign of the cross.  I don't suppose it was
orthodox, and it rendered chaotic some of my religious notions, but
I thought more of Craig that moment than ever before.  He was more
man than minister, or perhaps he was so good a minister that day
because so much a man.  As he read about the Saviour and the
children and the disciples who tried to get in between them, and as
he told us the story in his own simple and beautiful way, and then
went on to picture the home of the little children, and the same
Saviour in the midst of them, I felt my heart grow warm, and I
could easily understand the cry of the mother--

'Oh, mon Jesu, prenez moi aussi, take me wiz mon mignon.'

The cry wakened Slavin's heart, and he said huskily--

'Oh! Annette! Annette!'

'Ah, oui! an' Michael too!'  Then to Mr. Craig--

'You tink He's tak me some day?  Eh?'

'All who love Him,' he replied.

'An' Michael too?' she asked, her eyes searching his face, 'An'
Michael too?'

But Craig only replied: 'All who love Him.'

'Ah, Michael, you must pray le bon Jesu.  He's garde notre mignon.'
And then she bent over the babe, whispering--

'Ah, mon cheri, mon amour, adieu! adieu! mon ange!' till Slavin put
his arms about her and took her away, for as she was whispering her
farewells, her baby, with a little answering sigh, passed into the
House with many rooms.

'Whisht, Annette darlin'; don't cry for the baby,' said her
husband.  'Shure it's better off than the rest av us, it is.  An'
didn't ye hear what the minister said about the beautiful place it
is?  An' shure he wouldn't lie to us at all.'  But a mother cannot
be comforted for her first-born son.

An hour later Nixon brought Father Goulet.  He was a little
Frenchman with gentle manners and the face of a saint.  Craig
welcomed him warmly, and told him what he had done.

'That is good, my brother,' he said, with gentle courtesy, and,
turning to the mother, 'Your little one is safe.'

Behind Father Goulet came Nixon softly, and gazed down upon the
little quiet face, beautiful with the magic of death.  Slavin came
quietly and stood beside him.  Nixon turned and offered his hand.
But Slavin said, moving slowly back--

'I did ye a wrong, Nixon, an' it's a sorry man I am this day for
it.'

'Don't say a word, Slavin,' answered Nixon, hurriedly.  'I know how
you feel.  I've got a baby too.  I want to see it again.  That's
why the break hurt me so.'

'As God's above,' replied Slavin earnestly, 'I'll hinder ye no
more.'  They shook hands, and we passed out.

We laid the baby under the pines, not far from Billy Breen, and the
sweet spring wind blew through the Gap, and came softly down the
valley, whispering to the pines and the grass and the hiding
flowers of the New Life coming to the world.  And the mother must
have heard the whisper in her heart, for, as the Priest was saying
the words of the Service, she stood with Mrs. Mavor's arms about
her, and her eyes were looking far away beyond the purple mountain-
tops, seeing what made her smile.  And Slavin, too, looked
different.  His very features seemed finer.  The coarseness was
gone out of his face.  What had come to him I could not tell.

But when the doctor came into Slavin's house that night it was the
old Slavin I saw, but with a look of such deadly fury on his face
that I tried to get the doctor out at once.  But he was half drunk
and after his manner was hideously humorous.

'How do, ladies!  How do, gentlemen!' was his loud-voiced salutation.
'Quite a professional gathering, clergy predominating.  Lion and Lamb
too, ha! ha! which is the lamb, eh? ha! ha! very good! awfully sorry
to hear of your loss, Mrs. Slavin; did our best you know, can't help
this sort of thing.'

Before any one could move, Craig was at his side, and saying in a
clear, firm voice, 'One moment, doctor,' caught him by the arm and
had him out of the room before he knew it.  Slavin, who had been
crouching in his chair with hands twitching and eyes glaring, rose
and followed, still crouching as he walked.  I hurried after him,
calling him back.  Turning at my voice, the doctor saw Slavin
approaching.  There was something so terrifying in his swift
noiseless crouching motion, that the doctor, crying out in fear
'Keep him off,' fairly turned and fled.  He was too late.  Like a
tiger Slavin leaped upon him and without waiting to strike had him
by the throat with both hands, and bearing him to the ground,
worried him there as a dog might a cat.

Immediately Craig and I were upon him, but though we lifted him
clear off the ground we could not loosen that two-handed strangling
grip.  At we were struggling there a light hand touched my
shoulder.  It was Father Goulet.

'Please let him go, and stand away from us,' he said, waving us
back.  We obeyed.  He leaned over Slavin and spoke a few words to
him.  Slavin started as if struck a heavy blow, looked up at the
priest with fear in his face, but still keeping his grip.

'Let him go,' said the priest.  Slavin hesitated.  'Let him go!
quick!' said the priest again, and Slavin with a snarl let go his
hold and stood sullenly facing the priest.

Father Goulet regarded him steadily for some seconds and then
asked--

'What would you do?'  His voice was gentle enough, even sweet, but
there was something in it that chilled my marrow.  'What would you
do?' he repeated.

'He murdered my child,' growled Slavin.

'Ah! how?'

'He was drunk and poisoned him.'

'Ah! who gave him drink?  Who made him a drunkard two years ago?
Who has wrecked his life?'

There was no answer, and the even-toned voice went relentlessly on--

'Who is the murderer of your child now?'

Slavin groaned and shuddered.

'Go!' and the voice grew stern.  'Repent of your sin and add not
another.'

Slavin turned his eyes upon the motionless figure on the ground and
then upon the priest.  Father Goulet took one step towards him,
and, stretching out his hand and pointing with his finger, said--

'Go!'

And Slavin slowly backed away and went into his house.  It was an
extraordinary scene, and it is often with me now: the dark figure
on the ground, the slight erect form of the priest with
outstretched arm and finger, and Slavin backing away, fear and fury
struggling in his face.

It was a near thing for the doctor, however, and two minutes more
of that grip would have done for him.  As it was, we had the
greatest difficulty in reviving him.

What the priest did with Slavin after getting him inside I know
not; that has always been a mystery to me.  But when we were
passing the saloon that night after taking Mrs. Mavor home, we saw
a light and heard strange sounds within.  Entering, we found
another whisky raid in progress, Slavin himself being the raider.
We stood some moments watching him knocking in the heads of casks
and emptying bottles.  I thought he had gone mad, and approached
him cautiously.

'Hello, Slavin!' I called out; 'what does this mean?'

He paused in his strange work, and I saw that his face, though
resolute, was quiet enough.

'It means I'm done wid the business, I am,' he said, in a
determined voice.  'I'll help no more to kill any man, or,' in a
lower tone, 'any man's baby.'  The priest's words had struck home.

'Thank God, Slavin!' said Craig, offering his hand; 'you are much
too good a man for the business.'

'Good or bad, I'm done wid it,' he replied, going on with his work.

'You are throwing away good money, Slavin,' I said, as the head of
a cask crashed in.

'It's meself that knows it, for the price of whisky has riz in town
this week,' he answered, giving me a look out of the corner of his
eye.  'Bedad! it was a rare clever job,' referring to our Black
Rock Hotel affair.

'But won't you be sorry for this?' asked Craig.

'Beloike I will; an' that's why I'm doin' it before I'm sorry for
it,' he replied, with a delightful bull.

'Look here, Slavin,' said Craig earnestly; 'if I can be of use to
you in any way, count on me.'

'It's good to me the both of yez have been, an' I'll not forget it
to yez,' he replied, with like earnestness.

As we told Mrs. Mavor that night, for Craig thought it too good to
keep, her eyes seemed to grow deeper and the light in them to glow
more intense as she listened to Craig pouring out his tale.  Then
she gave him her hand and said--

'You have your man at last.'

'What man?'

'The man you have been waiting for.'

'Slavin!'

'Why not?'

'I never thought of it.'

'No more did he, nor any of us.'  Then, after a pause, she added
gently, 'He has been sent to us?'

'Do you know, I believe you are right,' Craig said slowly, and then
added, 'But you always are.'

'I fear not,' she answered; but I thought she liked to hear his
words.

The whole town was astounded next morning when Slavin went to work
in the mines, and its astonishment only deepened as the days went
on, and he stuck to his work.  Before three weeks had gone the
League had bought and remodelled the saloon and had secured Slavin
as Resident Manager.

The evening of the reopening of Slavin's saloon, as it was still
called, was long remembered in Black Rock.  It was the occasion of
the first appearance of 'The League Minstrel and Dramatic Troupe,'
in what was described as a 'hair-lifting tragedy with appropriate
musical selections.'  Then there was a grand supper and speeches
and great enthusiasm, which reached its climax when Nixon rose to
propose the toast of the evening--'Our Saloon.'  His speech was
simply a quiet, manly account of his long struggle with the deadly
enemy.  When he came to speak of his recent defeat he said--

'And while I am blaming no one but myself, I am glad to-night that
this saloon is on our side, for my own sake and for the sake of
those who have been waiting long to see me.  But before I sit down
I want to say that while I live I shall not forget that I owe my
life to the man that took me that night to his own shack and put me
in his own bed, and met me next morning with an open hand; for I
tell you I had sworn to God that that morning would be my last.'

Geordie's speech was characteristic.  After a brief reference to
the 'mysteerious ways o' Providence,' which he acknowledged he
might sometimes fail to understand, he went on to express his
unqualified approval of the new saloon.

'It's a cosy place, an' there's nae sulphur aboot.  Besides a'
that,' he went on enthusiastically, 'it'll be a terrible savin'.
I've juist been coontin'.'

'You bet!' ejaculated a voice with great emphasis.

'I've juist been coontin',' went on Geordie, ignoring the remark
and the laugh which followed, 'an' it's an awfu'-like money ye pit
ower wi' the whusky.  Ye see ye canna dae wi' ane bit glass; ye
maun hae twa or three at the verra least, for it's no verra forrit
ye get wi' ane glass.  But wi' yon coffee ye juist get a saxpence-
worth an' ye want nae mair.'

There was another shout of laughter, which puzzled Geordie much.

'I dinna see the jowk, but I've slippit ower in whusky mair nor a
hunner dollars.'

Then he paused, looking hard before him, and twisting his face into
extraordinary shapes till the men looked at him in wonder.

'I'm rale glad o' this saloon, but it's ower late for the lad that
canna be helpit the noo.  He'll not be needin' help o' oors, I
doot, but there are ithers'--and he stopped abruptly and sat down,
with no applause following.

But when Slavin, our saloon-keeper, rose to reply, the men jumped
up on the seats and yelled till they could yell no more.  Slavin
stood, evidently in trouble with himself, and finally broke out--

'It's spacheless I am entirely.  What's come to me I know not, nor
how it's come.  But I'll do my best for yez.'  And then the yelling
broke out again.

I did not yell myself.  I was too busy watching the varying lights
in Mrs. Mavor's eyes as she looked from Craig to the yelling men on
the benches and tables, and then to Slavin, and I found myself
wondering if she knew what it was that came to Slavin.


CHAPTER XI

THE TWO CALLS


With the call to Mr. Craig I fancy I had something to do myself.
The call came from a young congregation in an eastern city, and was
based partly upon his college record and more upon the advice of
those among the authorities who knew his work in the mountains.
But I flatter myself that my letters to friends who were of
importance in that congregation were not without influence, for I
was of the mind that the man who could handle Black Rock miners as
he could was ready for something larger than a mountain mission.
That he would refuse I had not imagined, though I ought to have
known him better.  He was but little troubled over it.  He went
with the call and the letters urging his acceptance to Mrs. Mavor.
I was putting the last touches to some of my work in the room at
the back of Mrs. Mavor's house when he came in.  She read the
letters and the call quietly, and waited for him to speak.

"Well?' he said; 'should I go?'

She started, and grew a little pale.  His question suggested a
possibility that had not occurred to her.  That he could leave his
work in Black Rock she had hitherto never imagined; but there was
other work, and he was fit for good work anywhere.  Why should he
not go?  I saw the fear in her face, but I saw more than fear in
her eyes, as for a moment or two she let them rest upon Craig's
face.  I read her story, and I was not sorry for either of them.
But she was too much a woman to show her heart easily to the man
she loved, and her voice was even and calm as she answered his
question.

'Is this a very large congregation?'

'One of the finest in all the East,' I put in for him.  'It will be
a great thing for Craig.'

Craig was studying her curiously.  I think she noticed his eyes
upon her, for she went on even more quietly--

'It will be a great chance for work, and you are able for a larger
sphere, you know, than poor Black Rock affords.'

'Who will take Black Rock?' he asked.

'Let some other fellow have a try at it,' I said.  'Why should you
waste your talents here?'

'Waste?' cried Mrs. Mavor indignantly.

'Well, "bury," if you like it better,' I replied.

'It would not take much of a grave for that funeral,' said Craig,
smiling.

'Oh,' said Mrs. Mavor, 'you will be a great man I know, and perhaps
you ought to go now.'

But he answered coolly: 'There are fifty men wanting that Eastern
charge, and there is only one wanting Black Rock, and I don't think
Black Rock is anxious for a change, so I have determined to stay
where I am yet a while.'

Even my deep disgust and disappointment did not prevent me from
seeing the sudden leap of joy in Mrs. Mavor's eyes, but she, with a
great effort, answered quietly--

'Black Rock will be very glad, and some of us very, very glad.'

Nothing could change his mind.  There was no one he knew who could
take his place just now, and why should he quit his work?  It
annoyed me considerably to feel he was right.  Why is it that the
right things are so frequently unpleasant?

And if I had had any doubt about the matter next Sabbath evening
would have removed it.  For the men came about him after the
service and let him feel in their own way how much they approved
his decision, though the self-sacrifice involved did not appeal to
them.  They were too truly Western to imagine that any inducements
the East could offer could compensate for his loss of the West.  It
was only fitting that the West should have the best, and so the
miners took almost as a matter of course, and certainly as their
right, that the best man they knew should stay with them.  But
there were those who knew how much of what most men consider worth
while he had given up, and they loved him no less for it.

Mrs. Mavor's call was not so easily disposed of.  It came close
upon the other, and stirred Black Rock as nothing else had ever
stirred it before.

I found her one afternoon gazing vacantly at some legal documents
spread out before her on the table, and evidently overcome by their
contents.  There was first a lawyer's letter informing her that by
the death of her husband's father she had come into the whole of
the Mavor estates, and all the wealth pertaining thereto.  The
letter asked for instructions, and urged an immediate return with a
view to a personal superintendence of the estates.  A letter, too,
from a distant cousin of her husband urged her immediate return for
many reasons, but chiefly on account of the old mother who had been
left alone with none nearer of kin than himself to care for her and
cheer her old age.

With these two came another letter from her mother-in-law herself.
The crabbed, trembling characters were even more eloquent than the
words with which the letter closed.

'I have lost my boy, and now my husband is gone, and I am a lonely
woman.  I have many servants, and some friends, but none near to
me, none so near and dear as my dead son's wife.  My days are not
to be many.  Come to me, my daughter; I want you and Lewis's
child.'

'Must I go?' she asked with white lips.

'Do you know her well?' I asked.

'I only saw her once or twice,' she answered; 'but she has been
very good to me.'

'She can hardly need you.  She has friends.  And surely you are
needed here.'

She looked at me eagerly.

'Do you think so?' she said.

'Ask any man in the camp--Shaw, Nixon, young Winton, Geordie.  Ask
Craig,' I replied.

'Yes, he will tell me,' she said.

Even as she spoke Craig came up the steps.  I passed into my studio
and went on with my work, for my days at Black Rock were getting
few, and many sketches remained to be filled in.

Through my open door I saw Mrs. Mavor lay her letters before Mr.
Craig, saying, 'I have a call too.'  They thought not of me.

He went through the papers, carefully laid them down without a word
while she waited anxiously, almost impatiently, for him to speak.

'Well?' she asked, using his own words to her; 'should I go?'

'I do not know,' he replied; 'that is for you to decide--you know
all the circumstances.'

'The letters tell all.'  Her tone carried a feeling of
disappointment.  He did not appear to care.

'The estates are large?' he asked.

'Yes, large enough--twelve thousand a year.'

'And has your mother-in-law any one with her?'

'She has friends, but, as she says, none near of kin.  Her nephew
looks after the works--iron works, you know--he has shares in
them.'

'She is evidently very lonely,' he answered gravely.

'What shall I do?' she asked, and I knew she was waiting to hear
him urge her to stay; but he did not see, or at least gave no heed.

'I cannot say,' he repeated quietly.  'There are many things to
consider; the estates--'

'The estates seem to trouble you,' she replied, almost fretfully.
He looked up in surprise.  I wondered at his slowness.

'Yes, the estates,' he went on, 'and tenants, I suppose--your
mother-in-law, your little Marjorie's future, your own future.'

'The estates are in capable hands, I should suppose,' she urged,
'and my future depends upon what I choose my work to be.'

'But one cannot shift one's responsibilities,' he replied gravely.
'These estates, these tenants, have come to you, and with them come
duties.'

'I do not want them,' she cried.

'That life has great possibilities of good,' he said kindly.

'I had thought that perhaps there was work for me here,' she
suggested timidly.

'Great work,' he hastened to say.  'You have done great work.  But
you will do that wherever you go.  The only question is where your
work lies.'

'You think I should go,' she said suddenly and a little bitterly.

'I cannot bid you stay,' he answered steadily.

'How can I go?' she cried, appealing to him.  'Must I go?'

How he could resist that appeal I could not understand.  His face
was cold and hard, and his voice was almost harsh as he replied--

'If it is right, you will go--you must go.'

Then she burst forth--

'I cannot go.  I shall stay here.  My work is here; my heart is
here.  How can I go?  You thought it worth your while to stay here
and work, why should not I?'

The momentary gleam in his eyes died out, and again he said coldly--

'This work was clearly mine.  I am needed here.'

'Yes, yes!' she cried, her voice full of pain; 'you are needed, but
there is no need of me.'

'Stop, stop!' he said sharply; 'you must not say so.'

'I will say it, I must say it,' she cried, her voice vibrating with
the intensity of her feeling.  'I know you do not need me; you have
your work, your miners, your plans; you need no one; you are
strong.  But,' and her voice rose to a cry, 'I am not strong by
myself; you have made me strong.  I came here a foolish girl,
foolish and selfish and narrow.  God sent me grief.  Three years
ago my heart died.  Now I am living again.  I am a woman now, no
longer a girl.  You have done this for me.  Your life, your words,
yourself--you have showed me a better, a higher life, than I had
ever known before, and now you send me away.'

She paused abruptly.

'Blind, stupid fool!' I said to myself.

He held himself resolutely in hand, answering carefully, but his
voice had lost its coldness and was sweet and kind.

'Have I done this for you?  Then surely God has been good to me.
And you have helped me more than any words could tell you.'

'Helped!' she repeated scornfully.

'Yes, helped,' he answered, wondering at her scorn.

'You can do without my help,' she went on.  'You make people help
you.  You will get many to help you; but I need help, too.'  She
was standing before him with her hands tightly clasped; her face
was pale, and her eyes deeper than ever.  He sat looking up at her
in a kind of maze as she poured out her words hot and fast.

'I am not thinking of you.'  His coldness had hurt her deeply.  'I
am selfish; I am thinking of myself.  How shall I do?  I have grown
to depend on you, to look to you.  It is nothing to you that I go,
but to me--'  She did not dare to finish.

By this time Craig was standing before her, his face deadly pale.
When she came to the end of her words, he said, in a voice low,
sweet, and thrilling with emotion--

'Ah, if you only knew!  Do not make me forget myself.  You do not
guess what you are doing.'

'What am I doing?  What is there to know, but that you tell me
easily to go?  She was struggling with the tears she was too proud
to let him see.

He put his hands resolutely behind him, looking at her as if
studying her face for the first time.  Under his searching look she
dropped her eyes, and the warm colour came slowly up into her neck
and face; then, as if with a sudden resolve, she lifted her eyes to
his, and looked back at him unflinchingly.

He started, surprised, drew slowly near, put his hands upon her
shoulders, surprise giving place to wild joy.  She never moved her
eyes; they drew him towards her.  He took her face between his
hands, smiled into her eyes, kissed her lips.  She did not move; he
stood back from her, threw up his head, and laughed aloud.  She
came to him, put her head upon his breast, and lifting up her face
said, 'Kiss me.'  He put his arms about her, bent down and kissed
her lips again, and then reverently her brow.  Then putting her
back from him, but still holding both her hands, he cried--

'Not you shall not go.  I shall never let you go.'

She gave a little sigh of content, and, smiling up at him, said--

'I can go now'; but even as she spoke the flush died from her face,
and she shuddered.

'Never!' he almost shouted; 'nothing shall take you away.  We shall
work here together.'

'Ah, if we could, if we only could,' she said piteously.

'Why not?' he demanded fiercely.

'You will send me away.  You will say it is right for me to go,'
she replied sadly.

'Do we not love each other?' was his impatient answer.

'Ah! yes, love,' she said; 'but love is not all.'

'No!' cried Craig; 'but love is the best'

'Yes!' she said sadly; 'love is the best, and it is for love's sake
we will do the best.'

'There is no better work than here.  Surely this is best,' and he
pictured his plans before her.  She listened eagerly.

'Oh! if it should be right,' she cried, 'I will do what you say.
You are good, you are wise, you shall tell me.'

She could not have recalled him better.  He stood silent some
moments, then burst out passionately--

'Why then has love come to us?  We did not seek it.  Surely love is
of God.  Does God mock us?'

He threw himself into his chair, pouring out his words of
passionate protestation.  She listened, smiling, then came to him
and, touching his hair as a mother might her child's, said--

'Oh, I am very happy!  I was afraid you would not care, and I could
not bear to go that way.'

'You shall not go,' he cried aloud, as if in pain.  'Nothing can
make that right.'

But she only said, 'You shall tell me to-morrow.  You cannot see
to-night, but you will see, and you will tell me.'

He stood up and, holding both her hands, looked long into her eyes,
then turned abruptly away and went out.

She stood where he left her for some moments, her face radiant, and
her hands pressed upon her heart.  Then she came toward my room.
She found me busy with my painting, but as I looked up and met her
eyes she flushed slightly, and said--

'I quite forgot you.'

'So it appeared to me.'

'You heard?'

'And saw,' I replied boldly.  'It would have been rude to
interrupt, you see.'

'Oh, I am so glad and thankful.'

'Yes; it was rather considerate of me.'

'Oh, I don't mean that,' the flush deepening; 'I am glad you know.'

'I have known some time.'

'How could you?  I only knew to-day myself.'

'I have eyes.'  She flushed again.

'Do you mean that people--' she began anxiously.

'No; I am not "people."  I have eyes, and my eyes have been
opened.'

'Opened?'

'Yes, by love.'

Then I told her openly how, weeks ago, I struggled with my heart
and mastered it, for I saw it was vain to love her, because she
loved a better man who loved her in return.  She looked at me shyly
and said--

'I am sorry.'

'Don't worry,' I said cheerfully.  'I didn't break my heart, you
know; I stopped it in time.'

'Oh!' she said, slightly disappointed; then her lips began to
twitch, and she went off into a fit of hysterical laughter.

'Forgive me,' she said humbly; 'but you speak as if it had been a
fever.'

'Fever is nothing to it,' I said solemnly.  'It was a near thing.'
At which she went off again.  I was glad to see her laugh.  It gave
me time to recover my equilibrium, and it relieved her intense
emotional strain.  So I rattled on some nonsense about Craig and
myself till I saw she was giving no heed, but thinking her own
thoughts: and what these were it was not hard to guess.

Suddenly she broke in upon my talk--

'He will tell me that I must go from him.'

'I hope he is no such fool,' I said emphatically and somewhat
rudely, I fear; for I confess I was impatient with the very
possibility of separation for these two, to whom love meant so
much.  Some people take this sort of thing easily and some not so
easily; but love for a woman like this comes once only to a man,
and then he carries it with him through the length of his life, and
warms his heart with it in death.  And when a man smiles or sneers
at such love as this, I pity him, and say no word, for my speech
would be in an unknown tongue.  So my heart was sore as I sat
looking up at this woman who stood before me, overflowing with the
joy of her new love, and dully conscious of the coming pain.  But I
soon found it was vain to urge my opinion that she should remain
and share the work and life of the man she loved.  She only
answered--

'You will help him all you can, for it will hurt him to have me
go.'

The quiver in her voice took out all the anger from my heart, and
before I knew I had pledged myself to do all I could to help him.

But when I came upon him that night, sitting in the light of his
fire, I saw he must be let alone.  Some battles we fight side by
side, with comrades cheering us and being cheered to victory; but
there are fights we may not share, and these are deadly fights
where lives are lost and won.  So I could only lay my hand upon his
shoulder without a word.  He looked up quickly, read my face, and
said, with a groan--

'You know?'

'I could not help it.  But why groan?'

'She will think it right to go,' he said despairingly.

'Then you must think for her; you must bring some common-sense to
bear upon the question.'

'I cannot see clearly yet,' he said; 'the light will come.'

'May I show you how I see it?' I asked.

'Go on,' he said.

For an hour I talked; eloquently, even vehemently urging the reason
and right of my opinion.  She would be doing no more than every
woman does, no more than she did before; her mother-in-law had a
comfortable home, all that wealth could procure, good servants, and
friends; the estates could be managed without her personal
supervision; after a few years' work here they would go east for
little Majorie's education; why should two lives be broken?--and so
I went on.

He listened carefully, even eagerly.

'You make a good case,' he said, with a slight smile.  'I will take
time.  Perhaps you are right.  The light will come.  Surely it will
come.  But,' and here he sprang up and stretched his arms to full
length above his head, 'I am not sorry; whatever comes I am not
sorry.  It is great to have her love, but greater to love her as I
do.  Thank God! nothing can take that away.  I am willing, glad to
suffer for the joy of loving her.'

Next morning, before I was awake, he was gone, leaving a note for
me:--


'MY DEAR CONNOR,--I am due at the Landing.  When I see you again I
think my way will be clear.  Now all is dark.  At times I am a
coward, and often, as you sometimes kindly inform me, an ass; but I
hope I may never become a mule.

I am willing to be led, or want to be, at any rate.  I must do the
best--not second best--for her, for me.  The best only is God's
will.  What else would you have?  Be good to her these days, dear
old fellow.--Yours, CRAIG.'


How often those words have braced me he will never know, but I am a
better man for them: 'The best only is God's will.  What else would
you have?'  I resolved I would rage and fret no more, and that I
would worry Mrs. Mavor with no more argument or expostulation, but,
as my friend had asked, 'Be good to her.'


CHAPTER XII

LOVE IS NOT ALL


Those days when we were waiting Craig's return we spent in the
woods or on the mountain sides, or down in the canyon beside the
stream that danced down to meet the Black Rock river, I talking and
sketching and reading, and she listening and dreaming, with often a
happy smile upon her face.  But there were moments when a cloud of
shuddering fear would sweep the smile away, and then I would talk
of Craig till the smile came back again.

But the woods and the mountains and the river were her best, her
wisest, friends during those days.  How sweet the ministry of the
woods to her!  The trees were in their new summer leaves, fresh and
full of life.  They swayed and rustled above us, flinging their
interlacing shadows upon us, and their swaying and their rustling
soothed and comforted like the voice and touch of a mother.  And
the mountains, too, in all the glory of their varying robes of
blues and purples, stood calmly, solemnly about us, uplifting our
souls into regions of rest.  The changing lights and shadows
flitted swiftly over their rugged fronts, but left them ever as
before in their steadfast majesty.  'God's in His heaven.'  What
would you have?  And ever the little river sang its cheerful
courage, fearing not the great mountains that threatened to bar its
passage to the sea.  Mrs. Mavor heard the song and her courage
rose.

'We too shall find our way,' she said, and I believed her.

But through these days I could not make her out, and I found myself
studying her as I might a new acquaintance.  Years had fallen from
her; she was a girl again, full of young warm life.  She was as
sweet as before, but there was a soft shyness over her, a half-
shamed, half-frank consciousness in her face, a glad light in her
eyes that made her all new to me.  Her perfect trust in Craig was
touching to see.

'He will tell me what to do,' she would say, till I began to
realise how impossible it would be for him to betray such trust,
and be anything but true to the best.

So much did I dread Craig's home-coming, that I sent for Graeme and
old man Nelson, who was more and more Graeme's trusted counsellor
and friend.  They were both highly excited by the story I had to
tell, for I thought it best to tell them all; but I was not a
little surprised and disgusted that they did not see the matter in
my light.  In vain I protested against the madness of allowing
anything to send these two from each other.  Graeme summed up the
discussion in his own emphatic way, but with an earnestness in his
words not usual with him.

'Craig will know better than any of us what is right to do, and he
will do that, and no man can turn him from it; and,' he added, 'I
should be sorry to try.'

Then my wrath rose, and I cried--

'It's a tremendous shame!  They love each other.  You are talking
sentimental humbug and nonsense!'

'He must do the right,' said Nelson in his deep, quiet voice.

'Right!  Nonsense!  By what right does he send from him the woman
he loves?'

'"He pleased not Himself,"' quoted Nelson reverently.

'Nelson is right,' said Graeme.  'I should not like to see him
weaken.'

'Look here,' I stormed; 'I didn't bring you men to back him up in
his nonsense.  I thought you could keep your heads level.'

'Now, Connor,' said Graeme, 'don't rage--leave that for the
heathen; it's bad form, and useless besides.  Craig will walk his
way where his light falls; and by all that's holy, I should hate to
see him fail; for if he weakens like the rest of us my North Star
will have dropped from my sky.'

'Nice selfish spirit,' I muttered.

'Entirely so.  I'm not a saint, but I feel like steering by one
when I see him.'

When after a week had gone, Craig rode up one early morning to his
shack door, his face told me that he had fought his fight and had
not been beaten.  He had ridden all night and was ready to drop
with weariness.

'Connor, old boy,' he said, putting out his hand; 'I'm rather
played.  There was a bad row at the Landing.  I have just closed
poor Colley's eyes.  It was awful.  I must get sleep.  Look after
Dandy, will you, like a good chap?'

'Oh, Dandy be hanged,!' I said, for I knew it was not the fight,
nor the watching, nor the long ride that had shaken his iron nerve
and given him that face.  'Go in and lie down I'll bring you
something.'

'Wake me in the afternoon,' he said; 'she is waiting.  Perhaps you
will go to her'--his lips quivered--'my nerve is rather gone.'
Then with a very wan smile he added, 'I am giving you a lot of
trouble.'

'You go to thunder!' I burst out, for my throat was hot and sore
with grief for him.

'I think I'd rather go to sleep,' he replied, still smiling.  I
could not speak, and was glad of the chance of being alone with
Dandy.

When I came in I found him sitting with his head in his arms upon
the table fast asleep.  I made him tea, forced him to take a warm
bath, and sent him to bed, while I went to Mrs. Mavor.  I went with
a fearful heart, but that was because I had forgotten the kind of
woman she was.

She was standing in the light of the window waiting for me.  Her
face was pale but steady, there was a proud light in her fathomless
eyes, a slight smile parted her lips, and she carried her head like
a queen.

'Come in,' she said.  'You need not fear to tell me.  I saw him
ride home.  He has not failed, thank God!  I am proud of him; I
knew he would be true.  He loves me'--she drew in her breath
sharply, and a faint colour tinged her cheek--'but he knows love is
not all--ah, love is not all!  Oh!  I am glad and proud!'

'Glad!' I gasped, amazed.

'You would not have him prove faithless!' she said with proud
defiance.

'Oh, it is high sentimental nonsense,' I could not help saying.

'You should not say so,' she replied, and her voice rang clear.
'Honour, faith, and duty are sentiments, but they are not
nonsense.'

In spite of my rage I was lost in amazed admiration of the high
spirit of the woman who stood up so straight before me.  But, as I
told how worn and broken he was, she listened with changing colour
and swelling bosom, her proud courage all gone, and only love,
anxious and pitying, in her eyes.

'Shall I go to him?' she asked with timid eagerness and deepening
colour.

'He is sleeping.  He said he would come to you,' I replied.

'I shall wait for him,' she said softly, and the tenderness in her
tone went straight to my heart, and it seemed to me a man might
suffer much to be loved with love such as this.

In the early afternoon Graeme came to her.  She met him with both
hands outstretched, saying in a low voice--

'I am very happy.'

'Are you sure?' he asked anxiously.

'Oh, yes,' she said, but her voice was like a sob; 'quite, quite
sure.'

They talked long together till I saw that Craig must soon be
coming, and I called Graeme away.  He held her hands, looking
steadily into her eyes and said--

'You are better even than I thought; I'm going to be a better man.'

Her eyes filled with tears, but her smile did not fade as she
answered--

'Yes! you will be a good man, and God will give you work to do.'

He bent his head over her hands and stepped back from her as from a
queen, but he spoke no word till we came to Craig's door.  Then he
said with humility that seemed strange in him, 'Connor, that is
great, to conquer oneself.  It is worth while.  I am going to try.'

I would not have missed his meeting with Craig.  Nelson was busy
with tea.  Craig was writing near the window.  He looked up as
Graeme came in, and nodded an easy good-evening; but Graeme strode
to him and, putting one hand on his shoulder, held out his other
for Craig to take.

After a moment's surprise, Craig rose to his feet, and, facing him
squarely, took the offered hand in both of his and held it fast
without a word.  Graeme was the first to speak, and his voice was
deep with emotion--

'You are a great man, a good man.  I'd give something to have your
grit.'

Poor Craig stood looking at him, not daring to speak for some
moments, then he said quietly--

'Not good nor great, but, thank God, not quite a traitor.'

'Good man!' went on Graeme, patting him on the shoulder.  'Good
man!  But it's tough.'

Craig sat down quickly, saying, 'Don't do that, old chap!'

I went up with Craig to Mrs. Mavor's door.  She did not hear us
coming, but stood near the window gazing up at the mountains.  She
was dressed in some rich soft stuff, and wore at her breast a bunch
of wild-flowers.  I had never seen her so beautiful.  I did not
wonder that Craig paused with his foot upon the threshold to look
at her.  She turned and saw us.  With a glad cry, 'Oh! my darling;
you have come to me,' she came with outstretched arms.  I turned
and fled, but the cry and the vision were long with me.

It was decided that night that Mrs. Mavor should go the next week.
A miner and his wife were going east, and I too would join the
party.

The camp went into mourning at the news; but it was understood that
any display of grief before Mrs. Mavor was bad form.  She was not
to be annoyed.

But when I suggested that she should leave quietly, and avoid the
pain of saying good-bye, she flatly refused--

'I must say good-bye to every man.  They love me and I love them.'

It was decided, too, at first, that there should be nothing in the
way of a testimonial, but when Craig found out that the men were
coming to her with all sorts of extraordinary gifts, he agreed that
it would be better that they should unite in one gift.  So it was
agreed that I should buy a ring for her.  And were it not that the
contributions were strictly limited to one dollar, the purse that
Slavin handed her when Shaw read the address at the farewell supper
would have been many times filled with the gold that was pressed
upon the committee.  There were no speeches at the supper, except
one by myself in reply on Mrs. Mavor's behalf.  She had given me
the words to say, and I was thoroughly prepared, else I should not
have got through.  I began in the usual way: 'Mr. Chairman, ladies
and gentlemen, Mrs. Mavor is--' but I got no further, for at the
mention of her name the men stood on the chairs and yelled until
they could yell no more.  There were over two hundred and fifty of
them, and the effect was overpowering.  But I got through my
speech.  I remember it well.  It began--

'Mrs. Mavor is greatly touched by this mark of your love, and she
will wear your ring always with pride.'  And it ended with--

'She has one request to make, that you will be true to the League,
and that you stand close about the man who did most to make it.
She wishes me to say that however far away she may have to go, she
is leaving her heart in Black Rock, and she can think of no greater
joy than to come back to you again.'

Then they had 'The Sweet By and By,' but the men would not join in
the refrain, unwilling to lose a note of the glorious voice they
loved to hear.  Before the last verse she beckoned to me.  I went
to her standing by Craig's side as he played for her.  'Ask them to
sing,' she entreated; 'I cannot bear it.'

'Mrs. Mavor wishes you to sing in the refrain,' I said, and at once
the men sat up and cleared their throats.  The singing was not
good, but at the first sound of the hoarse notes of the men Craig's
head went down over the organ, for he was thinking I suppose of the
days before them when they would long in vain for that thrilling
voice that soared high over their own hoarse tones.  And after the
voices died away he kept on playing till, half turning toward him,
she sang alone once more the refrain in a voice low and sweet and
tender, as if for him alone.  And so he took it, for he smiled up
at her his old smile full of courage and full of love.

Then for one whole hour she stood saying good-bye to those rough,
gentle-hearted men whose inspiration to goodness she had been for
five years.  It was very wonderful and very quiet.  It was
understood that there was to be no nonsense, and Abe had been heard
to declare that he would 'throw out any cotton-backed fool who
couldn't hold himself down,' and further, he had enjoined them to
remember that 'her arm wasn't a pump-handle.'

At last they were all gone, all but her guard of honour--Shaw,
Vernon Winton, Geordie, Nixon, Abe, Nelson, Craig, and myself.

This was the real farewell; for, though in the early light of the
next morning two hundred men stood silent about the stage, and then
as it moved out waved their hats and yelled madly, this was the
last touch they had of her hand.  Her place was up on the driver's
seat between Abe and Mr. Craig, who held little Marjorie on his
knee.  The rest of the guard of honour were to follow with Graeme's
team.  It was Winton's fine sense that kept Graeme from following
them close.  'Let her go out alone,' he said, and so we held back
and watched her go.

She stood with her back towards Abe's plunging four-horse team, and
steadying herself with one hand on Abe's shoulder, gazed down upon
us.  Her head was bare, her lips parted in a smile, her eyes
glowing with their own deep light; and so, facing us, erect and
smiling, she drove away, waving us farewell till Abe swung his team
into the canyon road and we saw her no more.  A sigh shuddered
through the crowd, and, with a sob in his voice, Winton said: 'God
help us all.'

I close my eyes and see it all again.  The waving crowd of dark-
faced men, the plunging horses, and, high up beside the driver, the
swaying, smiling, waving figure, and about all the mountains,
framing the picture with their dark sides and white peaks tipped
with the gold of the rising sun.  It is a picture I love to look
upon, albeit it calls up another that I can never see but through
tears.

I look across a strip of ever-widening water, at a group of men
upon the wharf, standing with heads uncovered, every man a hero,
though not a man of them suspects it, least of all the man who
stands in front, strong, resolute, self-conquered.  And, gazing
long, I think I see him turn again to his place among the men of
the mountains, not forgetting, but every day remembering the great
love that came to him, and remembering, too, that love is not all.
It is then the tears come.

But for that picture two of us at least are better men to-day.


CHAPTER XIII

HOW NELSON CAME HOME


Through the long summer the mountains and the pines were with me.
And through the winter, too, busy as I was filling in my Black Rock
sketches for the railway people who would still persist in ordering
them by the dozen, the memory of that stirring life would come over
me, and once more I would be among the silent pines and the mighty
snow-peaked mountains.  And before me would appear the red-shirted
shantymen or dark-faced miners, great, free, bold fellows, driving
me almost mad with the desire to seize and fix those swiftly
changing groups of picturesque figures.  At such times I would drop
my sketch, and with eager brush seize a group, a face, a figure,
and that is how my studio comes to be filled with the men of Black
Rock.  There they are all about me.  Graeme and the men from the
woods, Sandy, Baptiste, the Campbells, and in many attitudes and
groups old man Nelson; Craig, too, and his miners, Shaw, Geordie,
Nixon, and poor old Billy and the keeper of the League saloon.

It seemed as if I lived among them, and the illusion was greatly
helped by the vivid letters Graeme sent me from time to time.
Brief notes came now and then from Craig too, to whom I had sent a
faithful account of how I had brought Mrs. Mavor to her ship, and
of how I had watched her sail away with none too brave a face, as
she held up her hand that bore the miners' ring, and smiled with
that deep light in her eyes.  Ah! those eyes have driven me to
despair and made me fear that I am no great painter after all, in
spite of what my friends tell me who come in to smoke my good
cigars and praise my brush.  I can get the brow and hair, and mouth
and pose, but the eyes! the eyes elude me--and the faces of Mrs.
Mavor on my wall, that the men praise and rave over, are not such
as I could show to any of the men from the mountains.

Graeme's letters tell me chiefly about Craig and his doings, and
about old man Nelson; while from Craig I hear about Graeme, and how
he and Nelson are standing at his back, and doing what they can to
fill the gap that never can be filled.  The three are much
together, I can see, and I am glad for them all, but chiefly for
Craig, whose face, grief-stricken but resolute, and often gentle as
a woman's, will not leave me nor let me rest in peace.

The note of thanks he sent me was entirely characteristic.  There
were no heroics, much less pining or self-pity.  It was simple and
manly, not ignoring the pain but making much of the joy.  And then
they had their work to do.  That note, so clear, so manly, so nobly
sensible, stiffens my back yet at times.

In the spring came the startling news that Black Rock would soon be
no more.  The mines were to close down on April 1.  The company,
having allured the confiding public with enticing descriptions of
marvellous drifts, veins, assays, and prospects, and having
expended vast sums of the public's money in developing the mines
till the assurance of their reliability was absolutely final,
calmly shut down and vanished.  With their vanishing vanishes Black
Rock, not without loss and much deep cursing on the part of the men
brought some hundreds of miles to aid the company in its
extraordinary and wholly inexplicable game.

Personally it grieved me to think that my plan of returning to
Black Rock could never be carried out.  It was a great compensation,
however, that the three men most representative to me of that life
were soon to visit me actually in my own home and den.  Graeme's
letter said that in one month they might be expected to appear.  At
least he and Nelson were soon to come, and Craig would soon follow.

On receiving the great news, I at once looked up young Nelson and
his sister, and we proceeded to celebrate the joyful prospect with
a specially good dinner.  I found the greatest delight in picturing
the joy and pride of the old man in his children, whom he had not
seen for fifteen or sixteen years.  The mother had died some five
years before, then the farm was sold, and the brother and sister
came into the city; and any father might be proud of them.  The son
was a well-made young fellow, handsome enough, thoughtful, and
solid-looking.  The girl reminded me of her father.  The same
resolution was seen in mouth and jaw, and the same passion
slumbered in the dark grey eyes.  She was not beautiful, but she
carried herself well, and one would always look at her twice.  It
would be worth something to see the meeting between father and
daughter.

But fate, the greatest artist of us all, takes little count of the
careful drawing and the bright colouring of our fancy's pictures,
but with rude hand deranges all, and with one swift sweep paints
out the bright and paints in the dark.  And this trick he served me
when, one June night, after long and anxious waiting for some word
from the west, my door suddenly opened and Graeme walked in upon me
like a spectre, grey and voiceless.  My shout of welcome was choked
back by the look in his face, and I could only gaze at him and wait
for his word.  He gripped my hand, tried to speak, but failed to
make words come.

'Sit down, old man,' I said, pushing, him into my chair, 'and take
your time.'

He obeyed, looking up at me with burning, sleepless eyes.  My heart
was sore for his misery, and I said: 'Don't mind, old chap; it
can't be so awfully bad.  You're here safe and sound at any rate,'
and so I went on to give him time.  But he shuddered and looked
round and groaned.

'Now look here, Graeme, let's have it.  When did you land here?
Where is Nelson?  Why didn't you bring him up?'

'He is at the station in his coffin,' he answered slowly.

'In his coffin?' I echoed, my beautiful pictures all vanishing.
'How was it?'

'Through my cursed folly,' he groaned bitterly.

'What happened?' I asked.  But ignoring my question, he said: 'I
must see his children.  I have not slept for four nights.  I hardly
know what I am doing; but I can't rest till I see his children.  I
promised him.  Get them for me.'

'To-morrow will do.  Go to sleep now, and we shall arrange
everything to-morrow,' I urged.

'No!' he said fiercely; 'to-night--now!'

In half an hour they were listening, pale and grief-stricken, to
the story of their father's death.

Poor Graeme was relentless in his self-condemnation as he told how,
through his 'cursed folly,' old Nelson was killed.  The three,
Craig, Graeme, and Nelson, had come as far as Victoria together.
There they left Craig, and came on to San Francisco.  In an evil
hour Graeme met a companion of other and evil days, and it was not
long till the old fever came upon him.

In vain Nelson warned and pleaded.  The reaction from the monotony
and poverty of camp life to the excitement and luxury of the San
Francisco gaming palaces swung Graeme quite off his feet, and all
that Nelson could do was to follow from place to place and keep
watch.

'And there he would sit,' said Graeme in a hard, bitter voice,
'waiting and watching often till the grey morning light, while my
madness held me fast to the table.  One night,' here he paused a
moment, put his face in his hands and shuddered; but quickly he was
master of himself again, and went on in the same hard voice--'One
night my partner and I were playing two men who had done us up
before.  I knew they were cheating, but could not detect them.
Game after game they won, till I was furious at my stupidity in not
being able to catch them.  Happening to glance at Nelson in the
corner, I caught a meaning look, and looking again, he threw me a
signal.  I knew at once what the fraud was, and next game charged
the fellow with it.  He gave me the lie; I struck his mouth, but
before I could draw my gun, his partner had me by the arms.  What
followed I hardly know.  While I was struggling to get free, I saw
him reach for his weapon; but, as he drew it, Nelson sprang across
the table, and bore him down.  When the row was ever, three men lay
on the floor.  One was Nelson; he took the shot meant for me.'

Again the story paused.

'And the man that shot him?'

I started at the intense fierceness in the voice, and, looking upon
the girl, saw her eyes blazing with a terrible light.

'He is dead,' answered Graeme indifferently.

'You killed him?' she asked eagerly.

Graeme looked at her curiously, and answered slowly--

'I did not mean to.  He came at me.  I struck him harder than I
knew.  He never moved.'

She drew a sigh of satisfaction, and waited.

'I got him to a private ward, had the best doctor in the city, and
sent for Craig to Victoria.  For three days we thought he would
live--he was keen to get home; but by the time Craig came we had
given up hope.  Oh, but I was thankful to see Craig come in, and
the joy in the old man's eyes was beautiful to see.  There was no
pain at last, and no fear.  He would not allow me to reproach
myself, saying over and over, "You would have done the same for
me"--as I would, fast enough--"and it is better me than you.  I am
old and done; you will do much good yet for the boys."  And he kept
looking at me till I could only promise to do my best.

'But I am glad I told him how much good he had done me during the
last year, for he seemed to think that too good to be true.  And
when Craig told him how he had helped the boys in the camp, and how
Sandy and Baptiste and the Campbells would always be better men for
his life among them, the old man's face actually shone, as if light
were coming through.  And with surprise and joy he kept on saying,
"Do you think so?  Do you think so?  Perhaps so, perhaps so."  At
the last he talked of Christmas night at the camp.  You were there,
you remember.  Craig had been holding a service, and something
happened, I don't know what, but they both knew.'

'I know,' I said, and I saw again the picture of the old man under
the pine, upon his knees in the snow, with his face turned up to
the stars.

'Whatever it was, it was in his mind at the very last, and I can
never forget his face as he turned it to Craig.  One hears of such
things: I had often, but had never put much faith in them; but joy,
rapture, triumph, these are what were in his face, as he said, his
breath coming short, "You said--He wouldn't--fail me--you were
right--not once--not once--He stuck to me--I'm glad he told me--
thank God--for you--you showed--me--I'll see Him--and--tell Him--'
And Craig, kneeling beside him so steady--I was behaving like a
fool--smiled down through his streaming tears into the dim eyes so
brightly, till they could see no more.  Thank him for that!  He
helped the old man through, and he helped me too, that night, thank
God!'  And Graeme's voice, hard till now, broke in a sob.

He had forgotten us, and was back beside his passing friend, and
all his self-control could not keep back the flowing tears.

'It was his life for mine,' he said huskily.

The brother and sister were quietly weeping, but spoke no word,
though I knew Graeme was waiting for them.

I took up the word, and told of what I had known of Nelson, and his
influence upon the men of Black Rock.  They listened eagerly
enough, but still without speaking.  There seemed nothing to say,
till I suggested to Graeme that he must get some rest.  Then the
girl turned to him, and, impulsively putting out her hand, said--

'Oh, it is all so sad; but how can we ever thank you?'

'Thank me!' gasped Graeme.  'Can you forgive me?  I brought him to
his death.'

'No, no!  You must not say so,' she answered hurriedly.  'You would
have done the same for him.'

'God knows I would,' said Graeme earnestly; 'and God bless you for
your words!'  And I was thankful to see the tears start in his dry,
burning eyes.

We carried him to the old home in the country, that he might lie by
the side of the wife he had loved and wronged.  A few friends met
us at the wayside station, and followed in sad procession along the
country road, that wound past farms and through woods, and at last
up to the ascent where the quaint, old wooden church, black with
the rains and snows of many years, stood among its silent graves.
The little graveyard sloped gently towards the setting sun, and
from it one could see, far on every side, the fields of grain and
meadowland that wandered off over softly undulating hills to meet
the maple woods at the horizon, dark, green, and cool.  Here and
there white farmhouses, with great barns standing near, looked out
from clustering orchards.

Up the grass-grown walk, and through the crowding mounds, over
which waves, uncut, the long, tangling grass, we bear our friend,
and let him gently down into the kindly bosom of mother earth,
dark, moist, and warm.  The sound of a distant cowbell mingles with
the voice of the last prayer; the clods drop heavily with heart-
startling echo; the mound is heaped and shaped by kindly friends,
sharing with one another the task; the long rough sods are laid
over and patted into place; the old minister takes farewell in a
few words of gentle sympathy; the brother and sister, with
lingering looks at the two graves side by side, the old and the
new, step into the farmer's carriage, and drive away; the sexton
locks the gate and goes home, and we are left outside alone.

Then we went back and stood by Nelson's grave.

After a long silence Graeme spoke.

'Connor, he did not grudge his life to me--and I think'--and here
the words came slowly--'I understand now what that means, "Who
loved me and gave Himself for me."'

Then taking off his hat, he said reverently, 'By God's help
Nelson's life shall not end, but shall go on.  Yes, old man!'
looking down upon the grave, 'I'm with you'; and lifting up his
face to the calm sky, 'God help me to be true.'

Then he turned and walked briskly away, as one might who had
pressing business, or as soldiers march from a comrade's grave to a
merry tune, not that they have forgotten, but they have still to
fight.

And this was the way old man Nelson came home.


CHAPTERS XIV.

GRAEME'S NEW BIRTH


There was more left in that grave than old man Nelson's dead body.
It seemed to me that Graeme left part, at least, of his old self
there, with his dead friend and comrade, in the quiet country
churchyard.  I waited long for the old careless, reckless spirit
to appear, but he was never the same again.  The change was
unmistakable, but hard to define.  He seemed to have resolved his
life into a definite purpose.  He was hardly so comfortable a
fellow to be with; he made me feel even more lazy and useless than
was my wont; but I respected him more, and liked him none the less.
As a lion he was not a success.  He would not roar.  This was
disappointing to me, and to his friends and mine, who had been
waiting his return with eager expectation of tales of thrilling and
bloodthirsty adventure.

His first days were spent in making right, or as nearly right as he
could, the break that drove him to the west.  His old firm (and I
have had more respect for the humanity of lawyers ever since)
behaved really well.  They proved the restoration of their
confidence in his integrity and ability by offering him a place in
the firm, which, however, he would not accept.  Then, when he felt
clean, as he said, he posted off home, taking me with him.  During
the railway journey of four hours he hardly spoke; but when we had
left the town behind, and had fairly got upon the country road that
led toward the home ten miles away, his speech came to him in a
great flow.  His spirits ran over.  He was like a boy returning
from his first college term.  His very face wore the boy's open,
innocent, earnest look that used to attract men to him in his first
college year.  His delight in the fields and woods, in the sweet
country air and the sunlight, was without bound.  How often had we
driven this road together in the old days!

Every turn was familiar.  The swamp where the tamaracks stood
straight and slim out of their beds of moss; the brule, as we used
to call it, where the pine-stumps, huge and blackened, were half-
hidden by the new growth of poplars and soft maples; the big hill,
where we used to get out and walk when the roads were bad; the
orchards, where the harvest apples were best and most accessible--
all had their memories.

It was one of those perfect afternoons that so often come in the
early Canadian summer, before Nature grows weary with the heat.
The white gravel road was trimmed on either side with turf of
living green, close cropped by the sheep that wandered in flocks
along its whole length.  Beyond the picturesque snake-fences
stretched the fields of springing grain, of varying shades of
green, with here and there a dark brown patch, marking a turnip
field or summer fallow, and far back were the woods of maple and
beech and elm, with here and there the tufted top of a mighty pine,
the lonely representative of a vanished race, standing clear above
the humbler trees.

As we drove through the big swamp, where the yawning, haunted gully
plunges down to its gloomy depths, Graeme reminded me of that night
when our horse saw something in that same gully, and refused to go
past; and I felt again, though it was broad daylight, something of
the grue that shivered down my back, as I saw in the moonlight the
gleam of a white thing far through the pine trunks.

As we came nearer home the houses became familiar.  Every house had
its tale: we had eaten or slept in most of them; we had sampled
apples, and cherries, and plums from their orchards, openly as
guests, or secretly as marauders, under cover of night--the more
delightful way, I fear.  Ah! happy days, with these innocent crimes
and fleeting remorses, how bravely we faced them, and how gaily we
lived them, and how yearningly we look back at them now!  The sun
was just dipping into the tree-tops of the distant woods behind as
we came to the top of the last hill that overlooked the valley, in
which lay the village of Riverdale.  Wooded hills stood about it on
three sides, and, where the hills faded out, there lay the mill-
pond sleeping and smiling in the sun.  Through the village ran the
white road, up past the old frame church, and on to the white manse
standing among the trees.  That was Graeme's home, and mine too,
for I had never known another worthy of the name.  We held up our
team to look down over the valley, with its rampart of wooded
hills, its shining pond, and its nestling village, and on past to
the church and the white manse, hiding among the trees.  The
beauty, the peace, the warm, loving homeliness of the scene came
about our hearts, but, being men, we could find no words.

'Let's go,' cried Graeme, and down the hill we tore and rocked and
swayed to the amazement of the steady team, whose education from
the earliest years had impressed upon their minds the criminality
of attempting to do anything but walk carefully down a hill, at
least for two-thirds of the way.  Through the village, in a cloud
of dust, we swept, catching a glimpse of a well-known face here and
there, and flinging a salutation as we passed, leaving the owner of
the face rooted to his place in astonishment at the sight of Graeme
whirling on in his old-time, well-known reckless manner.  Only old
Dunc. M'Leod was equal to the moment, for as Graeme called out,
'Hello, Dunc.!' the old man lifted up his hands, and called back in
an awed voice: 'Bless my soul! is it yourself?'

'Stands his whisky well, poor old chap!' was Graeme's comment.

As we neared the church he pulled up his team, and we went quietly
past the sleepers there, then again on the full run down the gentle
slope, over the little brook, and up to the gate.  He had hardly
got his team pulled up before, flinging me the lines, he was out
over the wheel, for coming down the walk, with her hands lifted
high, was a dainty little lady, with the face of an angel.  In a
moment Graeme had her in his arms.  I heard the faint cry, 'My boy,
my boy,' and got down on the other side to attend to my off horse,
surprised to find my hands trembling and my eyes full of tears.
Back upon the steps stood an old gentleman, with white hair and
flowing beard, handsome, straight, and stately--Graeme's father,
waiting his turn.

'Welcome home, my lad,' was his greeting, as he kissed his son, and
the tremor of his voice, and the sight of the two men kissing each
other, like women, sent me again to my horses' heads.

'There's Connor, mother!' shouted out Graeme, and the dainty little
lady, in her black silk and white lace, came out to me quickly,
with outstretched hands.

'You, too, are welcome home,' she said, and kissed me.

I stood with my hat off, saying something about being glad to come,
but wishing that I could get away before I should make quite a fool
of myself.  For as I looked down upon that beautiful face, pale,
except for a faint flush upon each faded cheek, and read the story
of pain endured and conquered, and as I thought of all the long
years of waiting and of vain hoping, I found my throat dry and
sore, and the words would not come.  But her quick sense needed no
words, and she came to my help.

'You will find Jack at the stable,' she said, smiling; 'he ought to
have been here.'

The stable!  Why had I not thought of that before?  Thankfully now
my words came--

'Yes, certainly, I'll find him, Mrs. Graeme.  I suppose he's as
much of a scapegrace as ever, and off I went to look up Graeme's
young brother, who had given every promise in the old days of
developing into as stirring a rascal as one could desire; but who,
as I found out later, had not lived these years in his mother's
home for nothing.

'Oh, Jack's a good boy,' she answered, smiling again, as she turned
toward the other two, now waiting for her upon the walk.

The week that followed was a happy one for us all; but for the
mother it was full to the brim with joy.  Her sweet face was full
of content, and in her eyes rested a great peace.  Our days were
spent driving about among the hills, or strolling through the maple
woods, or down into the tamarack swamp, where the pitcher plants
and the swamp lilies and the marigold waved above the deep moss.
In the evenings we sat under the trees on the lawn till the stars
came out and the night dews drove us in.  Like two lovers, Graeme
and his mother would wander off together, leaving Jack and me to
each other.  Jack was reading for divinity, and was really a fine,
manly fellow, with all his brother's turn for rugby, and I took to
him amazingly; but after the day was over we would gather about the
supper table, and the talk would be of all things under heaven--
art, football, theology.  The mother would lead in all.  How quick
she was, how bright her fancy, how subtle her intellect, and
through all a gentle grace, very winning and beautiful to see!

Do what I would, Graeme would talk little of the mountains and his
life there.

'My lion will not roar, Mrs. Graeme,' I complained; 'he simply will
not.'

'You should twist his tail,' said Jack.

'That seems to be the difficulty, Jack,' said his mother, 'to get
hold of his tale.'

'Oh, mother,' groaned Jack; 'you never did such a thing before!
How could you?  Is it this baleful Western influence?'

'I shall reform, Jack,' she replied brightly.

'But, seriously, Graeme,' I remonstrated, 'you ought to tell your
people of your life--that free, glorious life in the mountains.'

'Free!  Glorious!  To some men, perhaps!' said Graeme, and then fell
into silence.

But I saw Graeme as a new man the night he talked theology with his
father.  The old minister was a splendid Calvinist, of heroic type,
and as he discoursed of God's sovereignty and election, his face
glowed and his voice rang out.

Graeme listened intently, now and then putting in a question, as
one would a keen knife-thrust into a foe.  But the old man knew his
ground, and moved easily among his ideas, demolishing the enemy as
he appeared, with jaunty grace.  In the full flow of his triumphant
argument, Graeme turned to him with sudden seriousness.

'Look here, father!  I was born a Calvinist, and I can't see how
any one with a level head can hold anything else, than that the
Almighty has some idea as to how He wants to run His universe, and
He means to carry out His idea, and is carrying it out; but what
would you do in a case like this?'  Then he told him the story of
poor Billy Breen, his fight and his defeat.

'Would you preach election to that chap?'

The mother's eyes were shining with tears.

The old gentleman blew his nose like a trumpet, and then said
gravely--

'No, my boy, you don't feed babes with meat.  But what came to
him?'

Then Graeme asked me to finish the tale.  After I had finished the
story of Billy's final triumph and of Craig's part in it, they sat
long silent, till the minister, clearing his throat hard and
blowing his nose more like a trumpet than ever, said with great
emphasis--

'Thank God for such a man in such a place!  I wish there were more
of us like him.'

'I should like to see you out there, sir,' said Graeme admiringly;
'you'd get them, but you wouldn't have time for election.'

'Yes, yes!' said his father warmly; 'I should love to have a chance
just to preach election to these poor lads.  Would I were twenty
years younger!'

'It is worth a man's life,' said Graeme earnestly.  His younger
brother turned his face eagerly toward the mother.  For answer she
slipped her hand into his and said softly, while her eyes shone
like stars--

'Some day, Jack, perhaps!  God knows.'  But Jack only looked
steadily at her, smiling a little and patting her hand.

'You'd shine there, mother,' said Graeme, smiling upon her; 'you'd
better come with me.'  She started, and said faintly--

'With you?'  It was the first hint he had given of his purpose.
'You are going back?'

'What! as a missionary?' said Jack.

'Not to preach, Jack; I'm not orthodox enough,' looking at his
father and shaking his head; 'but to build railroads and lend a
hand to some poor chap, if I can.'

'Could you not find work nearer home, my boy?' asked the father;
'there is plenty of both kinds near us here, surely.'

'Lots of work, but not mine, I fear,' answered Graeme, keeping his
eyes away from his mother's face.  'A man must do his own work.'

His voice was quiet and resolute, and glancing at the beautiful
face at the end of the table, I saw in the pale lips and yearning
eyes that the mother was offering up her firstborn, that ancient
sacrifice.  But not all the agony of sacrifice could wring from her
entreaty or complaint in the hearing of her sons.  That was for
other ears and for the silent hours of the night.  And next morning
when she came down to meet us her face was wan and weary, but it
wore the peace of victory and a glory not of earth.  Her greeting
was full of dignity, sweet and gentle; but when she came to Graeme
she lingered over him and kissed him twice.  And that was all that
any of us ever saw of that sore fight.

At the end of the week I took leave of them, and last of all of the
mother.

She hesitated just a moment, then suddenly put her hands upon my
shoulders and kissed me, saying softly, 'You are his friend; you
will sometimes come to me?'

'Gladly, if I may,' I hastened to answer, for the sweet, brave face
was too much to bear; and, till she left us for that world of which
she was a part, I kept my word, to my own great and lasting good.
When Graeme met me in the city at the end of the summer, he brought
me her love, and then burst forth--

'Connor, do you know, I have just discovered my mother!  I have
never known her till this summer.'

'More fool you,' I answered, for often had I, who had never known a
mother, envied him his.

'Yes, that is true,' he answered slowly; 'but you cannot see until
you have eyes.'

Before he set out again for the west I gave him a supper, asking
the men who had been with us in the old 'Varsity days.  I was
doubtful as to the wisdom of this, and was persuaded only by
Graeme's eager assent to my proposal.

'Certainly, let's have them,' he said; 'I shall be awfully glad to
see them; great stuff they were.'

'But, I don't know, Graeme; you see--well--hang it!--you know--
you're different, you know.'

He looked at me curiously.

'I hope I can still stand a good supper, and if the boys can't
stand me, why, I can't help it.  I'll do anything but roar, and
don't you begin to work off your menagerie act--now, you hear me!'

'Well, it is rather hard lines that when I have been talking up my
lion for a year, and then finally secure him, that he will not
roar.'

'Serve you right,' he replied, quite heartlessly; 'but I'll tell
you what I'll do, I'll feed!  Don't you worry,' he adds soothingly;
'the supper will go.'

And go it did.  The supper was of the best; the wines first-class.
I had asked Graeme about the wines.

'Do as you like, old man,' was his answer; 'it's your supper, but,'
he added, 'are the men all straight?'

I ran them over in my mind.

'Yes; I think so.'

If not, don't you help them down; and anyway, you can't be too
careful.  But don't mind me; I am quit of the whole business from
this out.'  So I ventured wines, for the last time, as it happened.

We were a quaint combination.  Old 'Beetles,' whose nickname was
prophetic of his future fame as a bugman, as the fellows
irreverently said; 'Stumpy' Smith, a demon bowler; Polly Lindsay,
slow as ever and as sure as when he held the half-back line with
Graeme, and used to make my heart stand still with terror at his
cool deliberation.  But he was never known to fumble nor to funk,
and somehow he always got us out safe enough.  Then there was
Rattray--'Rat' for short--who, from a swell, had developed into a
cynic with a sneer, awfully clever and a good enough fellow at
heart.  Little 'Wig' Martin, the sharpest quarter ever seen, and
big Barney Lundy, centre scrimmage, whose terrific roar and rush
had often struck terror to the enemy's heart, and who was Graeme's
slave.  Such was the party.

As the supper went on my fears began to vanish, for if Graeme did
not 'roar,' he did the next best thing--ate and talked quite up to
his old form.  Now we played our matches over again, bitterly
lamenting the 'if's' that had lost us the championships, and wildly
approving the tackles that had saved, and the runs that had made
the 'Varsity crowd go mad with delight and had won for us.  And as
their names came up in talk, we learned how life had gone with
those who had been our comrades of ten years ago.  Some, success
had lifted to high places; some, failure had left upon the rocks,
and a few lay in their graves.

But as the evening wore on, I began to wish that I had left out the
wines, for the men began to drop an occasional oath, though I had
let them know during the summer that Graeme was not the man he had
been.  But Graeme smoked and talked and heeded not, till Rattray
swore by that name most sacred of all ever borne by man.  Then
Graeme opened upon him in a cool, slow way--

'What an awful fool a man is, to damn things as you do, Rat.
Things are not damned.  It is men who are; and that is too bad to
be talked much about but when a man flings out of his foul mouth
the name of Jesus Christ'--here he lowered his voice--'it's a
shame--it's more, it's a crime.'

There was dead silence, then Rattray replied--

'I suppose you're right enough, it is bad form; but crime is rather
strong, I think.'

'Not if you consider who it is,' said Graeme with emphasis.

'Oh, come now,' broke in Beetles.  'Religion is all right, is a
good thing, and I believe a necessary thing for the race, but no
one takes seriously any longer the Christ myth.'

'What about your mother, Beetles?' put in Wig Martin.

Beetles consigned him to the pit and was silent, for his father was
an Episcopal clergyman, and his mother a saintly woman.

'I fooled with that for some time, Beetles, but it won't do.  You
can't build a religion that will take the devil out of a man on a
myth.  That won't do the trick.  I don't want to argue about it,
but I am quite convinced the myth theory is not reasonable, and
besides, it wont work.'

'Will the other work?' asked Rattray, with a sneer.

'Sure!' said Grame; 'I've seen it.'

'Where?' challenged Rattray.  'I haven't seen much of it.'

'Yes, you have, Rattray, you know you have,' said Wig again.  But
Rattray ignored him.

'I'll tell you, boys,' said Graeme.  'I want you to know, anyway,
why I believe what I do.'

Then he told them the story of old man Nelson, from the old coast
days, before I knew him, to the end.  He told the story well.  The
stern fight and the victory of the life, and the self-sacrifice and
the pathos of the death appealed to these men, who loved fight and
could understand sacrifice.

'That's why I believe in Jesus Christ, and that's why I think it a
crime to fling His name about!'

'I wish to Heaven I could say that,' said Beetles.

'Keep wishing hard enough and it will come to you,' said Graeme.

'Look here, old chap,' said Rattray; 'you're quite right about
this; I'm willing to own up.  Wig is correct.  I know a few, at
least, of that stamp, but most of those who go in for that sort of
thing are not much account'

'For ten years, Rattray,' said Graeme in a downright, matter-of-
fact way, 'you and I have tried this sort of thing'--tapping a
bottle--'and we got out of it all there is to be got, paid well for
it, too, and--faugh! you know it's not good enough, and the more
you go in for it, the more you curse yourself.  So I have quit this
and I am going in for the other.'

'What! going in for preaching?'

'Not much--railroading--money in it--and lending a hand to fellows
on the rocks.'

'I say, don't you want a centre forward?' said big Barney in his
deep voice.

'Every man must play his game in his place, old chap.  I'd like to
see you tackle it, though, right well,' said Graeme earnestly.  And
so he did, in the after years, and good tackling it was.  But that
is another story.

'But, I say, Graeme,' persisted Beetles, 'about this business, do
you mean to say you go the whole thing--Jonah, you know, and the
rest of it?'

Graeme hesitated, then said--

'I haven't much of a creed, Beetles; don't really know how much I
believe.  But,' by this time he was standing, 'I do know that good
is good, and bad is bad, and good and bad are not the same.  And I
know a man's a fool to follow the one, and a wise man to follow the
other, and,' lowering his voice, 'I believe God is at the back of a
man who wants to get done with bad.  I've tried all that folly,'
sweeping his hand over the glasses and bottles, 'and all that goes
with it, and I've done with it'

'I'll go you that far,' roared big Barney, following his old
captain as of yore.

'Good man,' said Graeme, striking hands with him.

'Put me down,' said little Wig cheerfully.

Then I took up the word, for there rose before me the scene in the
League saloon, and I saw the beautiful face with the deep shining
eyes, and I was speaking for her again.  I told them of Craig and
his fight for these men's lives.  I told them, too, of how I had
been too indolent to begin.  'But,' I said, 'I am going this far
from to-night,' and I swept the bottles into the champagne tub.

'I say,' said Polly Lindsay, coming up in his old style, slow but
sure, 'let's all go in, say for five years.'  And so we did.  We
didn't sign anything, but every man shook hands with Graeme.

And as I told Craig about this a year later, when he was on his way
back from his Old Land trip to join Graeme in the mountains, he
threw up his head in the old way and said, 'It was well done.  It
must have been worth seeing.  Old man Nelson's work is not done
yet.  Tell me again,' and he made me go over the whole scene with
all the details put in.

But when I told Mrs. Mavor, after two years had gone, she only
said, 'Old things are passed away, all things are become new'; but
the light glowed in her eyes till I could not see their colour.
But all that, too, is another story.


CHAPTER XV

COMING TO THEIR OWN


A man with a conscience is often provoking, sometimes impossible.
Persuasion is lost upon him.  He will not get angry, and he looks
at one with such a far-away expression in his face that in striving
to persuade him one feels earthly and even fiendish.  At least this
was my experience with Craig.  He spent a week with me just before
he sailed for the Old Land, for the purpose, as he said, of getting
some of the coal dust and other grime out of him.

He made me angry the last night of his stay, and all the more that
he remained quite sweetly unmoved.  It was a strategic mistake of
mine to tell him how Nelson came home to us, and how Graeme stood
up before the 'Varsity chaps at my supper and made his confession
and confused Rattray's easy-stepping profanity, and started his own
five-year league.  For all this stirred in Craig the hero, and he
was ready for all sorts of heroic nonsense, as I called it.  We
talked of everything but the one thing, and about that we said not
a word till, bending low to poke my fire and to hide my face, I
plunged--

'You will see her, of course?'

He made no pretence of not understanding but answered--

'Of course.'

'There's really no sense in her staying over there,' I suggested.

'And yet she is a wise woman,' he said, as if carefully considering
the question.

'Heaps of landlords never see their tenants, and they are none the
worse.'

'The landlords?'

'No, the tenants.'

'Probably, having such landlords.'

'And as for the old lady, there must be some one in the connection
to whom it would be a Godsend to care for her.'

'Now, Connor,' he said quietly, 'don't.  We have gone over all
there is to be said.  Nothing new has come.  Don't turn it all up
again.'

Then I played the heathen and raged, as Graeme would have said,
till Craig smiled a little wearily and said--

'You exhaust yourself, old chap.  Have a pipe, do'; and after a
pause he added in his own way, 'What would you have?  The path
lies straight from my feet.  Should I quit it?  I could not so
disappoint you--and all of them.'

And I knew he was thinking of Graeme and the lads in the mountains
he had taught to be true men.  It did not help my rage, but it
checked my speech; so I smoked in silence till he was moved to say--

'And after all, you know, old chap, there are great compensations
for all losses; but for the loss of a good conscience towards God,
what can make up?'

But, all the same, I hoped for some better result from his visit to
Britain.  It seemed to me that something must turn up to change
such an unbearable situation.

The year passed, however, and when I looked into Craig's face again
I knew that nothing had been changed, and that he had come back to
take up again his life alone, more resolutely hopeful than ever.

But the year had left its mark upon him too.  He was a broader and
deeper man.  He had been living and thinking with men of larger
ideas and richer culture, and he was far too quick in sympathy with
life to remain untouched by his surroundings.  He was more tolerant
of opinions other than his own, but more unrelenting in his
fidelity to conscience and more impatient of half-heartedness and
self-indulgence.  He was full of reverence for the great scholars
and the great leaders of men he had come to know.

'Great, noble fellows they are, and extraordinarily modest,' he
said--'that is, the really great are modest.  There are plenty of
the other sort, neither great nor modest.  And the books to be
read!  I am quite hopeless about my reading.  It gave me a queer
sensation to shake hands with a man who had written a great book.
To hear him make commonplace remarks, to witness a faltering in
knowledge--one expects these men to know everything--and to
experience respectful kindness at his hands!'

'What of the younger men?' I asked.

'Bright, keen, generous fellows.  In things theoretical, omniscient;
but in things practical, quite helpless.  They toss about great
ideas as the miners lumps of coal.  They can call them by their book
names easily enough, but I often wondered whether they could put
them into English.  Some of them I coveted for the mountains.  Men
with clear heads and big hearts, and built after Sandy M'Naughton's
model.  It does seem a sinful waste of God's good human stuff to see
these fellows potter away their lives among theories living and
dead, and end up by producing a book!  They are all either making or
going to make a book.  A good thing we haven't to read them.  But
here and there among them is some quiet chap who will make a book
that men will tumble over each other to read.'

Then we paused and looked at each other.

'Well?' I said.  He understood me.

'Yes!' he answered slowly, 'doing great work.  Every one worships
her just as we do, and she is making them all do something worth
while, as she used to make us.'

He spoke cheerfully and readily as if he were repeating a lesson
well learned, but he could not humbug me.  I felt the heartache in
the cheerful tone.

'Tell me about her,' I said, for I knew that if he would talk it
would do him good.  And talk he did, often forgetting me, till, as
I listened, I found myself looking again into the fathomless eyes,
and hearing again the heart-searching voice.  I saw her go in and
out of the little red-tiled cottages and down the narrow back lanes
of the village; I heard her voice in a sweet, low song by the bed
of a dying child, or pouring forth floods of music in the great new
hall of the factory town near by.  But I could not see, though he
tried to show me, the stately gracious lady receiving the country
folk in her home.  He did not linger over that scene, but went back
again to the gate-cottage where she had taken him one day to see
Billy Breen's mother.

'I found the old woman knew all about me,' he said, simply enough;
'but there were many things about Billy she had never heard, and I
was glad to put her right on some points, though Mrs. Mavor would
not hear it.'

He sat silent for a little, looking into the coals; then went on in
a soft, quiet voice--

'It brought back the mountains and the old days to hear again
Billy's tones in his mother's voice, and to see her sitting there
in the very dress she wore the night of the League, you remember--
some soft stuff with black lace about it--and to hear her sing as
she did for Billy--ah! ah!'  His voice unexpectedly broke, but in a
moment he was master of himself and begged me to forgive his
weakness.  I am afraid I said words that should not be said--a
thing I never do, except when suddenly and utterly upset.

'I am getting selfish and weak,' he said; 'I must get to work.  I
am glad to get to work.  There is much to do, and it is worth
while, if only to keep one from getting useless and lazy.'

'Useless and lazy!' I said to myself, thinking of my life beside
his, and trying to get command of my voice, so as not to make quite
a fool of myself.  And for many a day those words goaded me to work
and to the exercise of some mild self-denial.  But more than all
else, after Craig had gone back to the mountains, Graeme's letters
from the railway construction camp stirred one to do unpleasant
duty long postponed, and rendered uncomfortable my hours of most
luxurious ease.  Many of the old gang were with him, both of
lumbermen and miners, and Craig was their minister.  And the
letters told of how he laboured by day and by night along the line
of construction, carrying his tent and kit with him, preaching
straight sermons, watching by sick men, writing their letters, and
winning their hearts; making strong their lives, and helping them
to die well when their hour came.  One day, these letters proved
too much for me, and I packed away my paints and brushes, and made
my vow unto the Lord that I would be 'useless and lazy' no longer,
but would do something with myself.  In consequence, I found myself
within three weeks walking the London hospitals, finishing my
course, that I might join that band of men who were doing something
with life, or, if throwing it away, were not losing it for nothing.
I had finished being a fool, I hoped, at least a fool of the
useless and luxurious kind.  The letter that came from Graeme, in
reply to my request for a position on his staff, was characteristic
of the man, both new and old, full of gayest humour and of most
earnest welcome to the work.

Mrs. Mavor's reply was like herself--

'I knew you would not long be content with the making of pictures,
which the world does not really need, and would join your friends
in the dear West, making lives that the world needs so sorely.'

But her last words touched me strangely--

'But be sure to be thankful every day for your privilege. . . .  It
will be good to think of you all, with the glorious mountains about
you, and Christ's own work in your hands. . . .  Ah! how we would
like to choose our work, and the place in which to do it!'

The longing did not appear in the words, but I needed no words to
tell me how deep and how constant it was.  And I take some credit
to myself, that in my reply I gave her no bidding to join our band,
but rather praised the work she was doing in her place, telling her
how I had heard of it from Craig.

The summer found me religiously doing Paris and Vienna, gaining a
more perfect acquaintance with the extent and variety of my own
ignorance, and so fully occupied in this interesting and wholesome
occupation that I fell out with all my correspondents, with the
result of weeks of silence between us.

Two letters among the heap waiting on my table in London made my
heart beat quick, but with how different feelings: one from Graeme
telling me that Craig had been very ill, and that he was to take
him home as soon as he could be moved.  Mrs. Mavor's letter told me
of the death of the old lady, who had been her care for the past
two years, and of her intention to spend some months in her old
home in Edinburgh.  And this letter it is that accounts for my
presence in a miserable, dingy, dirty little hall running off a
close in the historic Cowgate, redolent of the glories of the
splendid past, and of the various odours of the evil-smelling
present.  I was there to hear Mrs. Mavor sing to the crowd of
gamins that thronged the closes in the neighbourhood, and that had
been gathered into a club by 'a fine leddie frae the West End,' for
the love of Christ and His lost.  This was an 'At Home' night, and
the mothers and fathers, sisters and brothers, of all ages and
sizes were present.  Of all the sad faces I had ever seen, those
mothers carried the saddest and most woe-stricken.  'Heaven pity
us!' I found myself saying; 'is this the beautiful, the cultured,
the heaven-exalted city of Edinburgh?  Will it not, for this, be
cast down into hell some day, if it repent not of its closes and
their dens of defilement?  Oh! the utter weariness, the dazed
hopelessness of the ghastly faces!  Do not the kindly, gentle
church-going folk of the crescents and the gardens see them in
their dreams, or are their dreams too heavenly for these ghastly
faces to appear?'

I cannot recall the programme of the evening, but in my memory-
gallery is a vivid picture of that face, sweet, sad, beautiful,
alight with the deep glow of her eyes, as she stood and sang to
that dingy crowd.  As I sat upon the window-ledge listening to the
voice with its flowing song, my thoughts were far away, and I was
looking down once more upon the eager, coal-grimed faces in the
rude little church in Black Rock.  I was brought back to find
myself swallowing hard by an audible whisper from a wee lassie to
her mother--

'Mither!  See till yon man.  He's greetin'.'

When I came to myself she was singing 'The Land o' the Leal,' the
Scotch 'Jerusalem the Golden,' immortal, perfect.  It needed
experience of the hunger-haunted Cowgate closes, chill with the
black mist of an eastern haar, to feel the full bliss of the vision
in the words--


     'There's nae sorrow there, Jean,
      There's neither cauld nor care, Jean,
      The day is aye fair in
      The Land o' the Leal.'


A land of fair, warm days, untouched by sorrow and care, would be
heaven indeed to the dwellers of the Cowgate.

The rest of that evening is hazy enough to me now, till I find
myself opposite Mrs. Mavor at her fire, reading Graeme's letter;
then all is vivid again.

I could not keep the truth from her.  I knew it would be folly to
try.  So I read straight on till I came to the words--

'He has had mountain fever, whatever that may be, and he will not
pull up again.  If I can, I shall take him home to my mother'--when
she suddenly stretched out her hand, saying, 'Oh, let me read!' and
I gave her the letter.  In a minute she had read it, and began
almost breathlessly--

'Listen! my life is much changed.  My mother-in-law is gone; she
needs me no longer.  My solicitor tells me, too, that owing to
unfortunate investments there is need of money, so great need, that
it is possible that either the estates or the works must go.  My
cousin has his all in the works--iron works, you know.  It would be
wrong to have him suffer.  I shall give up the estates--that is
best.'  She paused.

'And come with me,' I cried.

'When do you sail?'

'Next week,' I answered eagerly.

She looked at me a few moments, and into her eyes there came a
light soft and tender, as she said--

'I shall go with you.'

And so she did; and no old Roman in all the glory of a Triumph
carried a prouder heart than I, as I bore her and her little one
from the train to Graeme's carriage, crying--

'I've got her.'

But his was the better sense, for he stood waving his hat and
shouting--

'He's all right,' at which Mrs. Mavor grew white; but when she
shook hands with him, the red was in her cheek again.

'It was the cable did it,' went on Graeme.  'Connor's a great
doctor!  His first case will make him famous.  Good prescription--
after mountain fever try a cablegram!'  And the red grew deeper in
the beautiful face beside us.

Never did the country look so lovely.  The woods were in their
gayest autumn dress; the brown fields were bathed in a purple haze;
the air was sweet and fresh with a suspicion of the coming frosts
of winter.  But in spite of all the road seemed long, and it was as
if hours had gone before our eyes fell upon the white manse
standing among the golden leaves.

'Let them go,' I cried, as Graeme paused to take in the view, and
down the sloping dusty road we flew on the dead run.

'Reminds one a little of Abe's curves,' said Graeme, as we drew up
at the gate.  But I answered him not, for I was introducing to each
other the two best women in the world.  As I was about to rush into
the house, Graeme seized me by the collar, saying--

'Hold on, Connor! you forget your place, you're next.'

'Why, certainly,' I cried, thankfully enough; 'what an ass I am!'

'Quite true,' said Graeme solemnly.

'Where is he?' I asked.

'At this present moment?' he asked, in a shocked voice.  'Why,
Connor, you surprise me.'

'Oh, I see!'

'Yes,' he went on gravely; 'you may trust my mother to be
discreetly attending to her domestic duties; she is a great woman,
my mother.'

I had no doubt of it, for at that moment she came out to us with
little Marjorie in her arms.

'You have shown Mrs. Mavor to her room, mother, I hope,' said
Graeme; but she only smiled and said--

'Run away with your horses, you silly boy,' at which he solemnly
shook his head.  'Ah, mother, you are deep--who would have thought
it of you?'

That evening the manse overflowed with joy, and the days that
followed were like dreams set to sweet music.

But for sheer wild delight, nothing in my memory can quite come up
to the demonstration organised by Graeme, with assistance from
Nixon, Shaw, Sandy, Abe, Geordie, and Baptiste, in honour of the
arrival in camp of Mr. and Mrs. Craig.  And, in my opinion, it
added something to the occasion, that after all the cheers for Mr.
and Mrs. Craig had died away, and after all the hats had come down,
Baptiste, who had never taken his eyes from that radiant face,
should suddenly have swept the crowd into a perfect storm of cheers
by excitedly seizing his tuque, and calling out in his shrill
voice--

'By gar!  Tree cheer for Mrs. Mavor.'

And for many a day the men of Black Rock would easily fall into the
old and well-loved name; but up and down the line of construction,
in all the camps beyond the Great Divide, the new name became as
dear as the old had ever been in Black Rock.

Those old wild days are long since gone into the dim distance of
the past.  They will not come again, for we have fallen into quiet
times; but often in my quietest hours I feel my heart pause in its
beat to hear again that strong, clear voice, like the sound of a
trumpet, bidding us to be men; and I think of them all--Graeme,
their chief, Sandy, Baptiste, Geordie, Abe, the Campbells, Nixon,
Shaw, all stronger, better for their knowing of him, and then I
think of Billy asleep under the pines, and of old man Nelson with
the long grass waving over him in the quiet churchyard, and all my
nonsense leaves me, and I bless the Lord for all His benefits, but
chiefly for the day I met the missionary of Black Rock in the
lumber-camp among the Selkirks.










This etext was produced by Douglas E. Levy.



THE BLAZED TRAIL

by Stewart Edward White




TO MY FATHER-- From whose early pioneer life are drawn many
of Harry Thorpe's experiences.



TABLE OF CONTENTS


PART I:  THE FOREST

PART II:  THE LANDLOOKER

PART III:  THE BLAZING OF THE TRAIL

PART IV:  THORPE'S DREAM GIRL

PART V:  THE FOLLOWING OF THE TRAIL




PART I:  THE FOREST



Chapter I


When history has granted him the justice of perspective, we
shall know the American Pioneer as one of the most picturesque
of her many figures.  Resourceful, self-reliant, bold; adapting
himself with fluidity to diverse circumstances and conditions;
meeting with equal cheerfulness of confidence and completeness of
capability both unknown dangers and the perils by which he has been
educated; seizing the useful in the lives of the beasts and men
nearest him, and assimilating it with marvellous rapidity; he
presents to the world a picture of complete adequacy which it would
be difficult to match in any other walk of life.  He is a strong
man, with a strong man's virtues and a strong man's vices.  In him
the passions are elemental, the dramas epic, for he lives in the age
when men are close to nature, and draw from her their forces.  He
satisfies his needs direct from the earth.  Stripped of all the
towns can give him, he merely resorts to a facile substitution.
It becomes an affair of rawhide for leather, buckskin for cloth,
venison for canned tomatoes.  We feel that his steps are planted on
solid earth, for civilizations may crumble without disturbing his
magnificent self-poise.  In him we perceive dimly his environment.
He has something about him which other men do not possess--a frank
clearness of the eye, a swing of the shoulder, a carriage of the
hips, a tilt of the hat, an air of muscular well-being which marks
him as belonging to the advance guard, whether he wears buckskin,
mackinaw, sombrero, or broadcloth.  The woods are there, the plains,
the rivers.  Snow is there, and the line of the prairie.  Mountain
peaks and still pine forests have impressed themselves subtly; so
that when we turn to admire his unconsciously graceful swing, we
seem to hear the ax biting the pine, or the prospector's pick
tapping the rock.  And in his eye is the capability of quiet humor,
which is just the quality that the surmounting of many difficulties
will give a man.

Like the nature he has fought until he understands, his disposition
is at once kindly and terrible.  Outside the subtleties of his
calling, he sees only red.  Relieved of the strenuousness of his
occupation, he turns all the force of the wonderful energies that
have carried him far where other men would have halted, to channels
in which a gentle current makes flood enough.  It is the mountain
torrent and the canal.  Instead of pleasure, he seeks orgies.  He
runs to wild excesses of drinking, fighting, and carousing--which
would frighten most men to sobriety--with a happy, reckless spirit
that carries him beyond the limits of even his extraordinary forces.

This is not the moment to judge him.  And yet one cannot help
admiring the magnificently picturesque spectacle of such energies
running riot.  The power is still in evidence, though beyond its
proper application.



Chapter II


In the network of streams draining the eastern portion of
Michigan and known as the Saginaw waters, the great firm of
Morrison & Daly had for many years carried on extensive logging
operations in the wilderness.  The number of their camps was legion,
of their employees a multitude.  Each spring they had gathered
in their capacious booms from thirty to fifty million feet of
pine logs.

Now at last, in the early eighties, they reached the end of their
holdings.  Another winter would finish the cut.  Two summers would
see the great mills at Beeson Lake dismantled or sold, while Mr.
Daly, the "woods partner" of the combination, would flit away to
the scenes of new and perhaps more extensive operations.  At this
juncture Mr. Daly called to him John Radway, a man whom he knew to
possess extensive experience, a little capital, and a desire for
more of both.

"Radway," said he, when the two found themselves alone in the mill
office, "we expect to cut this year some fifty millions, which will
finish our pine holdings in the Saginaw waters.  Most of this timber
lies over in the Crooked Lake district, and that we expect to put
in ourselves.  We own, however, five million on the Cass Branch
which we would like to log on contract.  Would you care to take
the job?"

"How much a thousand do you give?" asked Radway.

"Four dollars," replied the lumberman.

"I'll look at it," replied the jobber.

So Radway got the "descriptions" and a little map divided into
townships, sections, and quarter sections; and went out to look at
it.  He searched until he found a "blaze" on a tree, the marking
on which indicated it as the corner of a section.  From this corner
the boundary lines were blazed at right angles in either direction.
Radway followed the blazed lines.  Thus he was able accurately to
locate isolated "forties" (forty acres), "eighties," quarter
sections, and sections in a primeval wilderness.  The feat, however,
required considerable woodcraft, an exact sense of direction, and a
pocket compass.

These resources were still further drawn upon for the next task.
Radway tramped the woods, hills, and valleys to determine the most
practical route over which to build a logging road from the standing
timber to the shores of Cass Branch.  He found it to be an affair of
some puzzlement.  The pines stood on a country rolling with hills,
deep with pot-holes.  It became necessary to dodge in and out, here
and there, between the knolls, around or through the swamps, still
keeping, however, the same general direction, and preserving always
the requisite level or down grade.  Radway had no vantage point from
which to survey the country.  A city man would promptly have lost
himself in the tangle; but the woodsman emerged at last on the
banks of the stream, leaving behind him a meandering trail of
clipped trees that wound, twisted, doubled, and turned, but kept
ever to a country without steep hills.  From the main road he
purposed arteries to tap the most distant parts.

"I'll take it," said he to Daly.

Now Radway happened to be in his way a peculiar character.  He was
acutely sensitive to the human side of those with whom he had
dealings.  In fact, he was more inclined to take their point of view
than to hold his own.  For that reason, the subtler disputes were
likely to go against him.  His desire to avoid coming into direct
collision of opinion with the other man, veiled whatever of justice
might reside in his own contention.  Consequently it was difficult
for him to combat sophistry or a plausible appearance of right. Daly
was perfectly aware of Radway's peculiarities, and so proceeded to
drive a sharp bargain with him.

Customarily a jobber is paid a certain proportion of the agreed
price as each stage of the work is completed--so much when the
timber is cut; so much when it is skidded, or piled; so much when
it is stacked at the river, or banked; so much when the "drive"
down the waters of the river is finished.  Daly objected to this
method of procedure.

"You see, Radway," he explained, "it is our last season in the
country.  When this lot is in, we want to pull up stakes, so we
can't take any chances on not getting that timber in.  If you don't
finish your Job, it keeps us here another season.  There can be
no doubt, therefore, that you finish your job.  In other words,
we can't take any chances.  If you start the thing, you've got to
carry it 'way through."

"I think I can, Mr. Daly," the jobber assured him.

"For that reason," went on Daly, "we object to paying you as the
work progresses.  We've got to have a guarantee that you don't quit
on us, and that those logs will be driven down the branch as far as
the river in time to catch our drive.  Therefore I'm going to make
you a good price per thousand, but payable only when the logs are
delivered to our rivermen."

Radway, with his usual mental attitude of one anxious to justify
the other man, ended by seeing only his employer's argument.  He
did not perceive that the latter's proposition introduced into the
transaction a gambling element.  It became possible for Morrison &
Daly to get a certain amount of work, short of absolute completion,
done for nothing.

"How much does the timber estimate?" he inquired finally.

"About five millions."

"I'd need a camp of forty or fifty men then.  I don't see how I can
run such a camp without borrowing."

"You have some money, haven't you?"

"Yes; a little.  But I have a family, too."

"That's all right.  Now look here."  Daly drew towards him a sheet
of paper and began to set down figures showing how the financing
could be done.  Finally it was agreed.  Radway was permitted to draw
on the Company's warehouse for what provisions he would need.  Daly
let him feel it as a concession.

All this was in August.  Radway, who was a good practical woodsman,
set about the job immediately.  He gathered a crew, established his
camp, and began at once to cut roads through the country he had
already blazed on his former trip.

Those of us who have ever paused to watch a group of farmers working
out their road taxes, must have gathered a formidable impression of
road-clearing.  And the few of us who, besides, have experienced the
adventure of a drive over the same highway after the tax has been
pronounced liquidated, must have indulged in varied reflections as
to the inadequacy of the result.

Radway's task was not merely to level out and ballast the six feet
of a road-bed already constructed, but to cut a way for five miles
through the unbroken wilderness.  The way had moreover to be not
less than twenty-five feet wide, needed to be absolutely level and
free from any kind of obstructions, and required in the swamps
liberal ballasting with poles, called corduroys.  To one who will take
the trouble to recall the variety of woods, thickets, and jungles
that go to make up a wooded country--especially in the creek bottoms
where a logging road finds often its levelest way--and the piles of
windfalls, vines, bushes, and scrubs that choke the thickets with a
discouraging and inextricable tangle, the clearing of five miles to
street width will look like an almost hopeless undertaking.  Not only
must the growth be removed, but the roots must be cut out, and the
inequalities of the ground levelled or filled up.  Reflect further
that Radway had but a brief time at his disposal,--but a few months
at most,--and you will then be in a position to gauge the first
difficulties of those the American pioneer expects to encounter as
a matter of course.  The cutting of the road was a mere incident in
the battle with the wilderness.

The jobber, of course, pushed his roads as rapidly as possible, but
was greatly handicapped by lack of men.  Winter set in early and
surprised him with several of the smaller branches yet to finish.
The main line, however, was done.

At intervals squares were cut out alongside.  In them two long
timbers, or skids, were laid andiron-wise for the reception of the
piles of logs which would be dragged from the fallen trees.  They
were called skidways.  Then finally the season's cut began.

The men who were to fell the trees, Radway distributed along one
boundary of a "forty."  They were instructed to move forward across
the forty in a straight line, felling every pine tree over eight
inches in diameter.  While the "saw-gangs," three in number,
prepared to fell the first trees, other men, called "swampers,"
were busy cutting and clearing of roots narrow little trails down
through the forest from the pine to the skidway at the edge of the
logging road.  The trails were perhaps three feet wide, and marvels
of smoothness, although no attempt was made to level mere inequalities
of the ground.  They were called travoy roads (French "travois").
Down them the logs would be dragged and hauled, either by means of
heavy steel tongs or a short sledge on which one end of the timber
would be chained.

Meantime the sawyers were busy.  Each pair of men selected a tree,
the first they encountered over the blazed line of their "forty."
After determining in which direction it was to fall, they set to
work to chop a deep gash in that side of the trunk.

Tom Broadhead and Henry Paul picked out a tremendous pine which
they determined to throw across a little open space in proximity
to the travoy road.  One stood to right, the other to left, and
alternately their axes bit deep.  It was a beautiful sight this,
of experts wielding their tools.  The craft of the woodsman means
incidentally such a free swing of the shoulders and hips, such a
directness of stroke as the blade of one sinks accurately in the
gash made by the other, that one never tires of watching the grace
of it.  Tom glanced up as a sailor looks aloft.

"She'll do, Hank," he said.

The two then with a dozen half clips of the ax, removed the
inequalities of the bark from the saw's path.  The long, flexible
ribbon of steel began to sing, bending so adaptably to the hands
and motions of the men manipulating, that it did not seem possible
so mobile an instrument could cut the rough pine.  In a moment the
song changed timbre.  Without a word the men straightened their
backs.  Tom flirted along the blade a thin stream of kerosene oil
from a bottle in his hip pocket, and the sawyers again bent to
their work, swaying back and forth rhythmically, their muscles
rippling under the texture of their woolens like those of a panther
under its skin.  The outer edge of the saw-blade disappeared.

"Better wedge her, Tom," advised Hank.

They paused while, with a heavy sledge, Tom drove a triangle of
steel into the crack made by the sawing.  This prevented the weight
of the tree from pinching the saw, which is a ruin at once to the
instrument and the temper of the filer.  Then the rhythmical z-z-z!
z-z-z! again took up its song.

When the trunk was nearly severed, Tom drove another and thicker
wedge.

"Timber!" hallooed Hank in a long-drawn melodious call that melted
through the woods into the distance.  The swampers ceased work and
withdrew to safety.

But the tree stood obstinately upright.  So the saw leaped back and
forth a few strokes more.

"Crack!" called the tree.

Hank coolly unhooked his saw handle, and Tom drew the blade through
and out the other side.

The tree shivered, then leaded ever so slightly from the
perpendicular, then fell, at first gently, afterwards with a
crescendo rush, tearing through the branches of other trees,
bending the small timber, breaking the smallest, and at last
hitting with a tremendous crash and bang which filled the air with
a fog of small twigs, needles, and the powder of snow, that settled
but slowly.  There is nothing more impressive than this rush of
a pine top, excepting it be a charge of cavalry or the fall of
Niagara.  Old woodsmen sometimes shout aloud with the mere
excitement into which it lifts them.

Then the swampers, who had by now finished the travoy road, trimmed
the prostrate trunk clear of all protuberances.  It required fairly
skillful ax work.  The branches had to be shaved close and clear,
and at the same time the trunk must not be gashed.  And often a man
was forced to wield his instrument from a constrained position.

The chopped branches and limbs had now to be dragged clear and
piled.  While this was being finished, Tom and Hank marked off and
sawed the log lengths, paying due attention to the necessity of
avoiding knots, forks, and rotten places.  Thus some of the logs
were eighteen, some sixteen, or fourteen, and some only twelve feet
in length.

Next appeared the teamsters with their little wooden sledges, their
steel chains, and their tongs.  They had been helping the skidders
to place the parallel and level beams, or skids, on which the logs
were to be piled by the side of the road.  The tree which Tom and
Hank had just felled lay up a gentle slope from the new travoy
road, so little Fabian Laveque, the teamster, clamped the bite of
his tongs to the end of the largest, or butt, log.

"Allez, Molly!" he cried.

The horse, huge, elephantine, her head down, nose close to her
chest, intelligently spying her steps, moved.  The log half rolled
over, slid three feet, and menaced a stump.

"Gee!" cried Laveque.

Molly stepped twice directly sideways, planted her fore foot on a
root she had seen, and pulled sharply.  The end of the log slid
around the stump.

"Allez!" commanded Laveque.

And Molly started gingerly down the hill.  She pulled the timber,
heavy as an iron safe, here and there through the brush, missing no
steps, making no false moves, backing, and finally getting out of
the way of an unexpected roll with the ease and intelligence of
Laveque himself.  In five minutes the burden lay by the travoy road.
In two minutes more one end of it had been rolled on the little
flat wooden sledge and, the other end dragging, it was winding
majestically down through the ancient forest.  The little Frenchman
stood high on the forward end.  Molly stepped ahead carefully, with
the strange intelligence of the logger's horse.  Through the tall,
straight, decorative trunks of trees the little convoy moved with
the massive pomp of a dead warrior's cortege.  And little Fabian
Laveque, singing, a midget in the vastness, typified the indomitable
spirit of these conquerors of a wilderness.

When Molly and Fabian had travoyed the log to the skidway, they
drew it with a bump across the two parallel skids, and left it
there to be rolled to the top of the pile.

Then Mike McGovern and Bob Stratton and Jim Gladys took charge of
it.  Mike and Bob were running the cant-hooks, while Jim stood on
top of the great pile of logs already decked.  A slender, pliable
steel chain, like a gray snake, ran over the top of the pile and
disappeared through a pulley to an invisible horse,--Jenny, the
mate of Molly.  Jim threw the end of this chain down.  Bob passed
it over and under the log and returned it to Jim, who reached down
after it with the hook of his implement.  Thus the stick of timber
rested in a long loop, one end of which led to the invisible horse,
and the other Jim made fast to the top of the pile.  He did so by
jamming into another log the steel swamp-hook with which the chain
was armed.  When all was made fast, the horse started.

"She's a bumper!" said Bob.  "Look out, Mike!"

The log slid to the foot of the two parallel poles laid slanting up
the face of the pile.  Then it trembled on the ascent.  But one end
stuck for an instant, and at once the log took on a dangerous slant.
Quick as light Bob and Mike sprang forward, gripped the hooks of the
cant-hooks, like great thumbs and forefingers, and, while one held
with all his power, the other gave a sharp twist upward.  The log
straightened.  It was a master feat of power, and the knack of
applying strength justly.

At the top of the little incline, the timber hovered for a second.

"One more!" sang out Jim to the driver.  He poised, stepped
lightly up and over, and avoided by the safe hair's breadth being
crushed when the log rolled.  But it did not lie quite straight and
even.  So Mike cut a short thick block, and all three stirred the
heavy timber sufficiently to admit of the billet's insertion.

Then the chain was thrown down for another.

Jenny, harnessed only to a straight short bar with a hook in it,
leaned to her collar and dug in her hoofs at the word of command.
The driver, close to her tail, held fast the slender steel chain
by an ingenious hitch about the ever-useful swamp-hook.  When Jim
shouted "whoa!" from the top of the skidway, the driver did not
trouble to stop the horse,--he merely let go the hook.  So the power
was shut off suddenly, as is meet and proper in such ticklish
business.  He turned and walked back, and Jenny, like a dog, without
the necessity of command, followed him in slow patience.

Now came Dyer, the scaler, rapidly down the logging road, a small
slender man with a little, turned-up mustache.  The men disliked
him because of his affectation of a city smartness, and because he
never ate with them, even when there was plenty of room.  Radway
had confidence in him because he lived in the same shanty with him.
This one fact a good deal explains Radway's character.  The scaler's
duty at present was to measure the diameter of the logs in each
skidway, and so compute the number of board feet.  At the office he
tended van, kept the books, and looked after supplies.

He approached the skidway swiftly, laid his flexible rule across the
face of each log, made a mark on his pine tablets in the column to
which the log belonged, thrust the tablet in the pocket of his coat,
seized a blue crayon, in a long holder, with which he made an 8 as
indication that the log had been scaled, and finally tapped several
times strongly with a sledge hammer.  On the face of the hammer in
relief was an M inside of a delta.  This was the Company's brand,
and so the log was branded as belonging to them.  He swarmed all
over the skidway, rapid and absorbed, in strange contrast of
activity to the slower power of the actual skidding.  In a moment
he moved on to the next scene of operations without having said a
word to any of the men.

"A fine t'ing!" said Mike, spitting.

So day after day the work went on.  Radway spent his time tramping
through the woods, figuring on new work, showing the men how to do
things better or differently, discussing minute expedients with the
blacksmith, the carpenter, the cook.

He was not without his troubles.  First he had not enough men; the
snow lacked, and then came too abundantly; horses fell sick of colic
or caulked themselves; supplies ran low unexpectedly; trees turned
out "punk"; a certain bit of ground proved soft for travoying, and
so on.  At election-time, of course, a number of the men went out.

And one evening, two days after election-time, another and
important character entered the North woods and our story.



Chapter III


On the evening in question, some thirty or forty miles southeast of
Radway's camp, a train was crawling over a badly laid track which
led towards the Saginaw Valley.  The whole affair was very crude.
To the edge of the right-of-way pushed the dense swamp, like a black
curtain shutting the virgin country from the view of civilization.
Even by daylight the sight could have penetrated but a few feet.
The right-of-way itself was rough with upturned stumps, blackened by
fire, and gouged by many and varied furrows.  Across the snow were
tracks of animals.

The train consisted of a string of freight cars, one coach divided
half and half between baggage and smoker, and a day car occupied by
two silent, awkward women and a child.  In the smoker lounged a dozen
men.  They were of various sizes and descriptions, but they all wore
heavy blanket mackinaw coats, rubber shoes, and thick German socks
tied at the knee.  This constituted, as it were, a sort of uniform.
The air was so thick with smoke that the men had difficulty in
distinguishing objects across the length of the car.

The passengers sprawled in various attitudes.  Some hung their legs
over the arms of the seats; others perched their feet on the backs
of the seats in front; still others slouched in corners, half
reclining.  Their occupations were as diverse.  Three nearest the
baggage-room door attempted to sing, but without much success.  A
man in the corner breathed softly through a mouth organ, to the
music of which his seat mate, leaning his head sideways, gave close
attention.  One big fellow with a square beard swaggered back and
forth down the aisle offering to everyone refreshment from a quart
bottle.  It was rarely refused.  Of the dozen, probably three
quarters were more or less drunk.

After a time the smoke became too dense.  A short, thick-set fellow
with an evil dark face coolly thrust his heel through a window.  The
conductor, who, with the brakeman and baggage master, was seated in
the baggage van, heard the jingle of glass.  He arose.

"Guess I'll take up tickets," he remarked.  "Perhaps it will quiet
the boys down a little."

The conductor was a big man, raw-boned and broad, with a hawk face.
His every motion showed lean, quick, panther-like power.

"Let her went," replied the brakeman, rising as a matter of course
to follow his chief.

The brakeman was stocky, short, and long armed.  In the old fighting
days Michigan railroads chose their train officials with an eye to
their superior deltoids.  A conductor who could not throw an
undesirable fare through a car window lived a short official life.
The two men loomed on the noisy smoking compartment.

"Tickets, please!" clicked the conductor sharply.

Most of the men began to fumble about in their pockets, but the
three singers and the one who had been offering the quart bottle
did not stir.

"Ticket, Jack!" repeated the conductor, "come on, now."

The big bearded man leaned uncertainly against the seat.

"Now look here, Bud," he urged in wheedling tones, "I ain't got
no ticket.  You know how it is, Bud.  I blows my stake."  He fished
uncertainly in his pocket and produced the quart bottle, nearly
empty, "Have a drink?"

"No," said the conductor sharply.

"A' right," replied Jack, amiably, "take one myself."  He tipped
the bottle, emptied it, and hurled it through a window.  The
conductor paid no apparent attention to the breaking of the glass.

"If you haven't any ticket, you'll have to get off," said he.

The big man straightened up.

"You go to hell!" he snorted, and with the sole of his spiked boot
delivered a mighty kick at the conductor's thigh.

The official, agile as a wild cat, leaped back, then forward, and
knocked the man half the length of the car.  You see, he was used to
it.  Before Jack could regain his feet the official stood over him.

The three men in the corner had also risen, and were staggering down
the aisle intent on battle.  The conductor took in the chances with
professional rapidity.

"Get at 'em, Jimmy," said he.

And as the big man finally swayed to his feet, he was seized by the
collar and trousers in the grip known to "bouncers" everywhere,
hustled to the door, which someone obligingly opened, and hurled
from the moving train into the snow.  The conductor did not care
a straw whether the obstreperous Jack lit on his head or his feet,
hit a snowbank or a pile of ties.  Those were rough days, and the
preservation of authority demanded harsh measures.

Jimmy had got at 'em in a method of his own.  He gathered himself
into a ball of potential trouble, and hurled himself bodily at the
legs of his opponents which he gathered in a mighty bear hug.  It
would have been poor fighting had Jimmy to carry the affair to a
finish by himself, but considered as an expedient to gain time for
the ejectment proceedings, it was admirable.  The conductor returned
to find a kicking, rolling, gouging mass of kinetic energy knocking
the varnish off all one end of the car.  A head appearing, he coolly
batted it three times against a corner of the seat arm, after which
he pulled the contestant out by the hair and threw him into a seat
where he lay limp.  Then it could be seen that Jimmy had clasped
tight in his embrace a leg each of the other two.  He hugged them
close to his breast, and jammed his face down against them to
protect his features.  They could pound the top of his head and
welcome.  The only thing he really feared was a kick in the side,
and for that there was hardly room.

The conductor stood over the heap, at a manifest advantage.

"You lumber-jacks had enough, or do you want to catch it plenty?"

The men, drunk though they were, realized their helplessness.  They
signified they had had enough.  Jimmy thereupon released them and
stood up, brushing down his tousled hair with his stubby fingers.

"Now is it ticket or bounce?" inquired the conductor.

After some difficulty and grumbling, the two paid their fare and
that of the third, who was still dazed.  In return the conductor
gave them slips.  Then he picked his lantern from the overhead rack
whither he had tossed it, slung it on his left arm, and sauntered
on down the aisle punching tickets.  Behind him followed Jimmy.
When he came to the door he swung across the platform with the
easy lurch of the trainman, and entered the other car, where he
took the tickets of the two women and the boy.  One sitting in the
second car would have been unable to guess from the bearing or
manner of the two officials that anything had gone wrong.

The interested spectators of the little drama included two men near
the water-cooler who were perfectly sober.  One of them was perhaps
a little past the best of life, but still straight and vigorous.
His lean face was leather-brown in contrast to a long mustache and
heavy eyebrows bleached nearly white, his eyes were a clear steady
blue, and his frame was slender but wiry.  He wore the regulation
mackinaw blanket coat, a peaked cap with an extraordinarily high
crown, and buckskin moccasins over long stockings.

The other was younger, not more than twenty-six perhaps, with the
clean-cut, regular features we have come to consider typically
American.  Eyebrows that curved far down along the temples, and
eyelashes of a darkness in contrast to the prevailing note of his
complexion combined to lend him a rather brooding, soft, and
melancholy air which a very cursory second examination showed to
be fictitious.  His eyes, like the woodsman's, were steady, but
inquiring.  His jaw was square and settled, his mouth straight.  One
would be likely to sum him up as a man whose actions would be little
influenced by glamour or even by the sentiments.  And yet, equally,
it was difficult to rid the mind of the impression produced by his
eyes.  Unlike the other inmates of the car, he wore an ordinary
business suit, somewhat worn, but of good cut, and a style that
showed even over the soft flannel shirt.  The trousers were,
however, bound inside the usual socks and rubbers.

The two seat mates had occupied their time each in his own fashion.
To the elder the journey was an evil to be endured with the patience
learned in watching deer runways, so he stared straight before him,
and spat with a certain periodicity into the centre of the aisle.
The younger stretched back lazily in an attitude of ease which spoke
of the habit of travelling.  Sometimes he smoked a pipe.  Thrice he
read over a letter.  It was from his sister, and announced her
arrival at the little rural village in which he had made arrangements
for her to stay.  "It is interesting,--now," she wrote, "though the
resources do not look as though they would wear well.  I am learning
under Mrs. Renwick to sweep and dust and bake and stew and do a
multitude of other things which I always vaguely supposed came
ready-made.  I like it; but after I have learned it all, I do not
believe the practise will appeal to me much.  However, I can stand
it well enough for a year or two or three, for I am young; and then
you will have made your everlasting fortune, of course."

Harry Thorpe experienced a glow of pride each time he read this
part of the letter.  He liked the frankness of the lack of pretence;
he admired the penetration and self-analysis which had taught her
the truth that, although learning a new thing is always interesting,
the practising of an old one is monotonous.  And her pluck appealed
to him.  It is not easy for a girl to step from the position of
mistress of servants to that of helping about the housework of a
small family in a small town for the sake of the home to be found
in it.

"She's a trump!" said Thorpe to himself, "and she shall have
her everlasting fortune, if there's such a thing in the country."

He jingled the three dollars and sixty cents in his pocket, and
smiled.  That was the extent of his everlasting fortune at present.

The letter had been answered from Detroit.

"I am glad you are settled," he wrote.  "At least I know you have
enough to eat and a roof over you.  I hope sincerely that you will
do your best to fit yourself to your new conditions.  I know it is
hard, but with my lack of experience and my ignorance as to where
to take hold, it may be a good many years before we can do any
better."

When Helen Thorpe read this, she cried.  Things had gone wrong that
morning, and an encouraging word would have helped her.  The somber
tone of her brother's communication threw her into a fit of the
blues from which, for the first time, she saw her surroundings in a
depressing and distasteful light.  And yet he had written as he did
with the kindest possible motives.

Thorpe had the misfortune to be one of those individuals who, though
careless of what people in general may think of them, are in a
corresponding degree sensitive to the opinion of the few they
love.  This feeling was further exaggerated by a constitutional
shrinking from any outward manifestation of the emotions.  As a
natural result, he was often thought indifferent or discouraging
when in reality his natural affections were at their liveliest.  A
failure to procure for a friend certain favors or pleasures
dejected him, not only because of that friend's disappointment, but
because, also, he imagined the failure earned him a certain blame.
Blame from his heart's intimates he shrank from.  His life outside
the inner circles of his affections was apt to be so militant and
so divorced from considerations of amity, that as a matter of
natural reaction he became inclined to exaggerate the importance of
small objections, little reproaches, slight criticisms from his real
friends.  Such criticisms seemed to bring into a sphere he would have
liked to keep solely for the mutual reliance of loving kindness,
something of the hard utilitarianism of the world at large.  In
consequence he gradually came to choose the line of least resistance,
to avoid instinctively even the slightly disagreeable.  Perhaps for
this reason he was never entirely sincere with those he loved.  He
showed enthusiasm over any plan suggested by them, for the reason
that he never dared offer a merely problematical anticipation.
The affair had to be absolutely certain in his own mind before he
ventured to admit anyone to the pleasure of looking forward to
it,--and simply because he so feared the disappointment in case
anything should go wrong.  He did not realize that not only is
the pleasure of anticipation often the best, but that even
disappointment, provided it happen through excusable causes,
strengthens the bonds of affection through sympathy.  We do not
want merely results from a friend--merely finished products.  We
like to be in at the making, even though the product spoil.

This unfortunate tendency, together with his reserve, lent him the
false attitude of a rather cold, self-centered man, discouraging
suggestions at first only to adopt them later in the most
inexplicable fashion, and conferring favors in a ready-made
impersonal manner which destroyed utterly their quality as favors.
In reality his heart hungered for the affection which this false
attitude generally repelled.  He threw the wet blanket of doubt
over warm young enthusiasms because his mind worked with a certain
deliberateness which did not at once permit him to see the
practicability of the scheme.  Later he would approve.  But by that
time, probably, the wet blanket had effectually extinguished the
glow.  You cannot always savor your pleasures cold.

So after the disgrace of his father, Harry Thorpe did a great deal
of thinking and planning which he kept carefully to himself.  He
considered in turn the different occupations to which he could turn
his hand, and negatived them one by one.  Few business firms would
care to employ the son of as shrewd an embezzler as Henry Thorpe.
Finally he came to a decision.  He communicated this decision to his
sister.  It would have commended itself more logically to her had
she been able to follow step by step the considerations that had
led her brother to it.  As the event turned, she was forced to accept
it blindly.  She knew that her brother intended going West, but as
to his hopes and plans she was in ignorance.  A little sympathy, a
little mutual understanding would have meant a great deal to her,
for a girl whose mother she but dimly remembers, turns naturally to
her next of kin.  Helen Thorpe had always admired her brother, but
had never before needed him.  She had looked upon him as strong,
self-contained, a little moody.  Now the tone of his letter caused
her to wonder whether he were not also a trifle hard and cold.  So
she wept on receiving it, and the tears watered the ground for
discontent.

At the beginning of the row in the smoking car, Thorpe laid aside
his letter and watched with keen appreciation the direct practicality
of the trainmen's method.  When the bearded man fell before the
conductor's blow, he turned to the individual at his side.

"He knows how to hit, doesn't he!" he observed.  "That fellow was
knocked well off his feet."

"He does," agreed the other dryly.

They fell into a desultory conversation of fits and starts.  Woodsmen
of the genuine sort are never talkative; and Thorpe, as has been
explained, was constitutionally reticent.  In the course of their
disjointed remarks Thorpe explained that he was looking for work in
the woods, and intended, first of all, to try the Morrison & Daly
camps at Beeson Lake.

"Know anything about logging?" inquired the stranger.

"Nothing," Thorpe confessed.

"Ain't much show for anything but lumber-jacks.  What did you think
of doing?"

"I don't know," said Thorpe, doubtfully.  "I have driven horses a
good deal; I thought I might drive team."

The woodsman turned slowly and looked Thorpe over with a quizzical
eye.  Then he faced to the front again and spat.

"Quite like," he replied still more dryly.

The boy's remark had amused him, and he had showed it, as much as
he ever showed anything.  Excepting always the riverman, the driver
of a team commands the highest wages among out-of-door workers.  He
has to be able to guide his horses by little steps over, through,
and around slippery and bristling difficulties.  He must acquire
the knack of facing them square about in their tracks.  He must hold
them under a control that will throw into their collars, at command,
from five pounds to their full power of pull, lasting from five
seconds to five minutes.  And above all, he must be able to keep
them out of the way of tremendous loads of logs on a road which
constant sprinkling has rendered smooth and glassy, at the same
time preventing the long tongue from sweeping them bodily against
leg-breaking debris when a curve in the road is reached.  It is
easier to drive a fire engine than a logging team.

But in spite of the naivete of the remark, the woodsman had seen
something in Thorpe he liked.  Such men become rather expert in the
reading of character, and often in a log shanty you will hear
opinions of a shrewdness to surprise you.  He revised his first
intention to let the conversation drop.

"I think M. & D. is rather full up just now," he remarked.  "I'm
walkin'-boss there.  The roads is about all made, and road-making is
what a greenhorn tackles first.  They's more chance earlier in the
year.  But if the OLD Fellow" (he strongly accented the first
word) "h'aint nothin' for you, just ask for Tim Shearer, an' I'll
try to put you on the trail for some jobber's camp."

The whistle of the locomotive blew, and the conductor appeared in
the doorway.

"Where's that fellow's turkey?" he inquired.

Several men looked toward Thorpe, who, not understanding this argot
of the camps, was a little bewildered.  Shearer reached over his head
and took from the rack a heavy canvas bag, which he handed to the
conductor.

"That's the 'turkey'--" he explained, "his war bag.  Bud'll throw
it off at Scott's, and Jack'll get it there."

"How far back is he?" asked Thorpe.

"About ten mile.  He'll hoof it in all right."

A number of men descended at Scott's.  The three who had come into
collision with Jimmy and Bud were getting noisier.  They had
produced a stone jug, and had collected the remainder of the
passengers,--with the exception of Shearer and Thorpe,--and now were
passing the jug rapidly from hand to hand.  Soon they became musical,
striking up one of the weird long-drawn-out chants so popular with
the shanty boy.  Thorpe shrewdly guessed his companion to be a man
of weight, and did not hesitate to ascribe his immunity from
annoyance to the other's presence.

"It's a bad thing," said the walking-boss, "I used to be at it
myself, and I know.  When I wanted whisky, I needed it worse than a
scalded pup does a snow bank.  The first year I had a hundred and
fifty dollars, and I blew her all in six days.  Next year I had a
little more, but she lasted me three weeks.  That was better.  Next
year, I says to myself, I'll just save fifty of that stake, and blow
the rest.  So I did.  After that I got to be scaler, and sort've
quit.  I just made a deal with the Old Fellow to leave my stake with
headquarters no matter whether I call for it or not.  I got quite a
lot coming, now."

"Bees'n Lake!" cried Jimmy fiercely through an aperture of the door.

"You'll find th' boardin'-house just across over the track," said
the woodsman, holding out his hand, "so long.  See you again if you
don't find a job with the Old Fellow.  My name's Shearer."

"Mine is Thorpe," replied the other.  "Thank you."

The woodsman stepped forward past the carousers to the baggage
compartment, where he disappeared.  The revellers stumbled out the
other door.

Thorpe followed and found himself on the frozen platform of a
little dark railway station.  As he walked, the boards shrieked
under his feet and the sharp air nipped at his face and caught his
lungs.  Beyond the fence-rail protection to the side of the platform
he thought he saw the suggestion of a broad reach of snow, a
distant lurking forest, a few shadowy buildings looming mysterious
in the night.  The air was twinkling with frost and the brilliant
stars of the north country.

Directly across the track from the railway station, a single
building was picked from the dark by a solitary lamp in a lower-
story room.  The four who had descended before Thorpe made over
toward this light, stumbling and laughing uncertainly, so he knew
it was probably in the boarding-house, and prepared to follow them.
Shearer and the station agent,--an individual much muffled,--turned
to the disposition of some light freight that had been dropped from
the baggage car.

The five were met at the steps by the proprietor of the boarding-
house.  This man was short and stout, with a harelip and cleft
palate, which at once gave him the well-known slurring speech of
persons so afflicted, and imparted also to the timbre of his voice
a peculiarly hollow, resonant, trumpet-like note.  He stumped about
energetically on a wooden leg of home manufacture.  It was a
cumbersome instrument, heavy, with deep pine socket for the stump,
and a projecting brace which passed under a leather belt around the
man's waist.  This instrument he used with the dexterity of a third
hand.  As Thorpe watched him, he drove in a projecting nail, kicked
two "turkeys" dexterously inside the open door, and stuck the
armed end of his peg-leg through the top and bottom of the whisky
jug that one of the new arrivals had set down near the door.  The
whisky promptly ran out.  At this the cripple flirted the impaled
jug from the wooden leg far out over the rail of the verandah into
the snow.

A growl went up.

"What'n hell's that for I!" snarled one of the owners of the
whisky threateningly.

"Don't allow no whisky here," snuffed the harelip.

The men were very angry.  They advanced toward the cripple, who
retreated with astonishing agility to the lighted room.  There he
bent the wooden leg behind him, slipped the end of the brace from
beneath the leather belt, seized the other, peg end in his right
hand, and so became possessed of a murderous bludgeon.  This he
brandished, hopping at the same time back and forth in such perfect
poise and yet with so ludicrous an effect of popping corn, that the
men were surprised into laughing.

"Bully for you, peg-leg!" they cried.

"Rules 'n regerlations, boys," replied the latter, without,
however, a shade of compromising in his tones.  "Had supper?"

On receiving a reply in the affirmative, he caught up the lamp,
and, having resumed his artificial leg in one deft motion, led the
way to narrow little rooms.



Chapter IV


Thorpe was awakened a long time before daylight by the ringing
of a noisy bell.  He dressed, shivering, and stumbled down stairs
to a round stove, big as a boiler, into which the cripple dumped
huge logs of wood from time to time.  After breakfast Thorpe returned
to this stove and sat half dozing for what seemed to him untold
ages.  The cold of the north country was initiating him.

Men came in, smoked a brief pipe, and went out.  Shearer was one of
them.  The woodsman nodded curtly to the young man, his cordiality
quite gone.  Thorpe vaguely wondered why.  After a time he himself
put on his overcoat and ventured out into the town.  It seemed to
Thorpe a meager affair, built of lumber, mostly unpainted, with
always the dark, menacing fringe of the forest behind.  The great
saw mill, with its tall stacks and its row of water-barrels--
protection against fire--on top, was the dominant note.  Near the
mill crouched a little red-painted structure from whose stovepipe a
column of white smoke rose, attesting the cold, a clear hundred feet
straight upward, and to whose door a number of men were directing
their steps through the snow.  Over the door Thorpe could distinguish
the word "Office."  He followed and entered.

In a narrow aisle railed off from the main part of the room waited
Thorpe's companions of the night before.  The remainder of the
office gave accommodation to three clerks.  One of these glanced up
inquiringly as Thorpe came in.

"I am looking for work," said Thorpe.

"Wait there," briefly commanded the clerk.

In a few moments the door of the inner room opened, and Shearer
came out.  A man's head peered from within.

"Come on, boys," said he.

The five applicants shuffled through.  Thorpe found himself in the
presence of a man whom he felt to be the natural leader of these
wild, independent spirits.  He was already a little past middle
life, and his form had lost the elastic vigor of youth.  But his eye
was keen, clear, and wrinkled to a certain dry facetiousness; and
his figure was of that bulk which gives an impression of a subtler
weight and power than the merely physical.  This peculiarity
impresses us in the portraits of such men as Daniel Webster and
others of the old jurists.  The manner of the man was easy, good-
natured, perhaps a little facetious, but these qualities were
worn rather as garments than exhibited as characteristics.  He could
afford them, not because he had fewer difficulties to overcome or
battles to fight than another, but because his strength was so
sufficient to them that mere battles or difficulties could not
affect the deliberateness of his humor.  You felt his superiority
even when he was most comradely with you.  This man Thorpe was to
meet under other conditions, wherein the steel hand would more
plainly clink the metal.

He was now seated in a worn office chair before a littered desk.  In
the close air hung the smell of stale cigars and the clear fragrance
of pine.

"What is it, Dennis?" he asked the first of the men.

"I've been out," replied the lumberman.  "Have you got anything for
me, Mr. Daly?"

The mill-owner laughed.

"I guess so.  Report to Shearer.  Did you vote for the right man,
Denny?"

The lumberman grinned sheepishly.  "I don't know, sir.  I didn't get
that far."

"Better let it alone.  I suppose you and Bill want to come back,
too?" he added, turning to the next two in the line.  "All right,
report to Tim.  Do you want work?" he inquired of the last of the
quartette, a big bashful man with the shoulders of a Hercules.

"Yes, sir," answered the latter uncomfortably.

"What do you do?"

"I'm a cant-hook man, sir."

"Where have you worked?"

"I had a job with Morgan & Stebbins on the Clear River last winter."

"All right, we need cant-hook men.  Report at 'seven,' and if they
don't want you there, go to 'thirteen.'"

Daly looked directly at the man with an air of finality.  The
lumberman still lingered uneasily, twisting his cap in his hands.

"Anything you want?" asked Daly at last.

"Yes, sir," blurted the big man.  "If I come down here and tell
you I want three days off and fifty dollars to bury my mother, I
wish you'd tell me to go to hell!  I buried her three times last
winter!"

Daly chuckled a little.

"All right, Bub," said he, "to hell it is."

The man went out.  Daly turned to Thorpe with the last flickers of
amusement in his eyes.

"What can I do for you?" he inquired in a little crisper tones.
Thorpe felt that he was not treated with the same careless
familiarity, because, potentially, he might be more of a force to
deal with.  He underwent, too, the man's keen scrutiny, and knew
that every detail of his appearance had found its comment in the
other's experienced brain.

"I am looking for work," Thorpe replied.

"What kind of work?"

"Any kind, so I can learn something about the lumber business."

The older man studied him keenly for a few moments.

"Have you had any other business experience?"

"None."

"What have you been doing?"

"Nothing."

The lumberman's eyes hardened.

"We are a very busy firm here," he said with a certain deliberation;
"we do not carry a big force of men in any one department, and each

of those men has to fill his place and slop some over the sides.
We do not pretend or attempt to teach here.  If you want to be a
lumberman, you must learn the lumber business more directly than
through the windows of a bookkeeper's office.  Go into the woods.
Learn a few first principles.  Find out the difference between
Norway and white pine, anyway."

Daly, being what is termed a self-made man, entertained a prejudice
against youths of the leisure class.  He did not believe in their
earnestness of purpose, their capacity for knowledge, nor their
perseverance in anything.  That a man of twenty-six should be
looking for his first situation was incomprehensible to him.  He
made no effort to conceal his prejudice, because the class to which
the young man had belonged enjoyed his hearty contempt.

The truth is, he had taken Thorpe's ignorance a little too much
for granted.  Before leaving his home, and while the project of
emigration was still in the air, the young fellow had, with the
quiet enthusiasm of men of his habit of mind, applied himself
to the mastering of whatever the books could teach.  That is not
much.  The literature on lumbering seems to be singularly limited.
Still he knew the trees, and had sketched an outline into which to
paint experience.  He said nothing of this to the man before him,
because of that strange streak in his nature which prompted him to
conceal what he felt most strongly; to leave to others the task of
guessing out his attitude; to stand on appearances without attempting
to justify them, no matter how simple the justification might be.
A moment's frank, straightforward talk might have caught Daly's
attention, for the lumberman was, after all, a shrewd reader of
character where his prejudices were not concerned.  Then events
would have turned out very differently.

After his speech the business man had whirled back to his desk.

"Have you anything for me to do in the woods, then?" the other
asked quietly.

"No," said Daly over his shoulder.

Thorpe went out.

Before leaving Detroit he had, on the advice of friends, visited
the city office of Morrison & Daly.  There he had been told
positively that the firm were hiring men.  Now, without five dollars
in his pocket, he made the elementary discovery that even in
chopping wood skilled labor counts.  He did not know where to turn
next, and he would not have had the money to go far in any case.
So, although Shearer's brusque greeting that morning had argued a
lack of cordiality, he resolved to remind the riverman of his
promised assistance.

That noon he carried out his resolve.  To his surprise Shearer was
cordial--in his way.  He came afterward to appreciate the subtle
nuances of manner and treatment by which a boss retains his moral
supremacy in a lumber country,--repels that too great familiarity
which breeds contempt, without imperiling the trust and comradeship
which breeds willingness.  In the morning Thorpe had been a
prospective employee of the firm, and so a possible subordinate of
Shearer himself.  Now he was Shearer's equal.

"Go up and tackle Radway.  He's jobbing for us on the Cass Branch.
He needs men for roadin', I know, because he's behind.  You'll get a
job there."

"Where is it?" asked Thorpe.

"Ten miles from here.  She's blazed, but you better wait for th'
supply team, Friday.  If you try to make her yourself, you'll get
lost on some of th' old loggin' roads."

Thorpe considered.

"I'm busted," he said at last frankly.

"Oh, that's all right," replied the walking-boss.  "Marshall, come
here!"

The peg-legged boarding-house keeper stumped in.

"What is it?" he trumpeted snufflingly.

"This boy wants a job till Friday.  Then he's going up to Radway's
with the supply team.  Now quit your hollerin' for a chore-boy for a
few days."

"All right," snorted Marshall, "take that ax and split some dry
wood that you'll find behind the house."

"I'm very much obliged to you," began Thorpe to the walking-boss,
"and---"

"That's all right," interrupted the latter, "some day you can give
me a job."



Chapter V


For five days Thorpe cut wood, made fires, drew water, swept
floors, and ran errands.  Sometimes he would look across the broad
stump-dotted plain to the distant forest.  He had imagination.  No
business man succeeds without it.  With him the great struggle to
wrest from an impassive and aloof nature what she has so long held
securely as her own, took on the proportions of a battle.  The
distant forest was the front.  To it went the new bands of fighters.
From it came the caissons for food, that ammunition of the frontier;
messengers bringing tidings of defeat or victory; sometimes men
groaning on their litters from the twisting and crushing and
breaking inflicted on them by the calm, ruthless enemy; once a dead
man bearing still on his chest the mark of the tree that had killed
him.  Here at headquarters sat the general, map in hand, issuing his
orders, directing his forces.

And out of the forest came mystery.  Hunters brought deer on sledges.
Indians, observant and grave, swung silently across the reaches
on their snowshoes, and silently back again carrying their meager
purchases.  In the daytime ravens wheeled and croaked about the
outskirts of the town, bearing the shadow of the woods on their
plumes and of the north-wind in the somber quality of their voices;
rare eagles wheeled gracefully to and fro; snow squalls coquetted
with the landscape.  At night the many creatures of the forest
ventured out across the plains in search of food,--weasels; big
white hares; deer, planting daintily their little sharp hoofs where
the frozen turnips were most plentiful; porcupines in quest of
anything they could get their keen teeth into;--and often the big
timber wolves would send shivering across the waste a long whining
howl.  And in the morning their tracks would embroider the snow with
many stories.

The talk about the great stove in the boarding-house office also
possessed the charm of balsam fragrance.  One told the other occult
facts about the "Southeast of the southwest of eight."  The second
in turn vouchsafed information about another point of the compass.
Thorpe heard of many curious practical expedients.  He learned that
one can prevent awkward air-holes in lakes by "tapping" the ice
with an ax,--for the air must get out, naturally or artificially;
that the top log on a load should not be large because of the
probability, when one side has dumped with a rush, of its falling
straight down from its original height, so breaking the sleigh;
that a thin slice of salt pork well peppered is good when tied
about a sore throat; that choking a horse will cause him to swell
up and float on the top of the water, thus rendering it easy to
slide him out on the ice from a hole he may have broken into; that
a tree lodged against another may be brought to the ground by
felling a third against it; that snowshoes made of caribou hide do
not become baggy, because caribou shrinks when wet, whereas other
rawhide stretches.  These, and many other things too complicated to
elaborate here, he heard discussed by expert opinion.  Gradually
he acquired an enthusiasm for the woods, just as a boy conceives
a longing for the out-of-door life of which he hears in the
conversation of his elders about the winter fire.  He became eager
to get away to the front, to stand among the pines, to grapple with
the difficulties of thicket, hill, snow, and cold that nature
silently interposes between the man and his task.

At the end of the week he received four dollars from his employer;
dumped his valise into a low bobsleigh driven by a man muffled in a
fur coat; assisted in loading the sleigh with a variety of things,
from Spearhead plug to raisins; and turned his face at last toward
the land of his hopes and desires.

The long drive to camp was at once a delight and a misery to him.
Its miles stretched longer and longer as time went on; and the
miles of a route new to a man are always one and a half at least.
The forest, so mysterious and inviting from afar, drew within
itself coldly when Thorpe entered it.  He was as yet a stranger.
The snow became the prevailing note.  The white was everywhere,
concealing jealously beneath rounded uniformity the secrets of the
woods.  And it was cold.  First Thorpe's feet became numb, then his
hands, then his nose was nipped, and finally his warm clothes were
lifted from him by invisible hands, and he was left naked to
shivers and tremblings.  He found it torture to sit still on the top
of the bale of hay; and yet he could not bear to contemplate the
cold shock of jumping from the sleigh to the ground,--of touching
foot to the chilling snow.  The driver pulled up to breathe his
horses at the top of a hill, and to fasten under one runner a heavy
chain, which, grinding into the snow, would act as a brake on the
descent.

"You're dressed pretty light," he advised; "better hoof it a ways
and get warm."

The words tipped the balance of Thorpe's decision.  He descended
stiffly, conscious of a disagreeable shock from a six-inch jump.

In ten minutes, the wallowing, slipping, and leaping after the
tail of the sled had sent his blood tingling to the last of his
protesting members.  Cold withdrew.  He saw now that the pines were
beautiful and solemn and still; and that in the temple of their
columns dwelt winter enthroned.  Across the carpet of the snow
wandered the trails of her creatures,--the stately regular prints
of the partridge; the series of pairs made by the squirrel; those
of the weasel and mink, just like the squirrels' except that the
prints were not quite side by side, and that between every other
pair stretched the mark of the animal's long, slender body; the
delicate tracery of the deer mouse; the fan of the rabbit; the print
of a baby's hand that the raccoon left; the broad pad of a lynx;
the dog-like trail of wolves;--these, and a dozen others, all equally
unknown, gave Thorpe the impression of a great mysterious multitude
of living things which moved about him invisible.  In a thicket of
cedar and scrub willow near the bed of a stream, he encountered one
of those strangely assorted bands of woods-creatures which are
always cruising it through the country.  He heard the cheerful little
chickadee; he saw the grave nuthatch with its appearance of a total
lack of humor; he glimpsed a black-and-white woodpecker or so, and
was reviled by a ribald blue jay.  Already the wilderness was taking
its character to him.

After a little while, they arrived by way of a hill, over which
they plunged into the middle of the camp.  Thorpe saw three large
buildings, backed end to end, and two smaller ones, all built of
heavy logs, roofed with plank, and lighted sparsely through one or
two windows apiece.  The driver pulled up opposite the space between
two of the larger buildings, and began to unload his provisions.
Thorpe set about aiding him, and so found himself for the first
time in a "cook camp."

It was a commodious building,--Thorpe had no idea a log structure
ever contained so much room.  One end furnished space for two
cooking ranges and two bunks placed one over the other.  Along one
side ran a broad table-shelf, with other shelves over it and numerous
barrels underneath, all filled with cans, loaves of bread, cookies,
and pies.  The center was occupied by four long bench-flanked tables,
down whose middle straggled utensils containing sugar, apple-butter,
condiments, and sauces, and whose edges were set with tin dishes for
about forty men.  The cook, a rather thin-faced man with a mustache,
directed where the provisions were to be stowed; and the "cookee,"
a hulking youth, assisted Thorpe and the driver to carry them in.
During the course of the work Thorpe made a mistake.

"That stuff doesn't come here," objected the cookee, indicating a
box of tobacco the newcomer was carrying.  "She goes to the 'van.'"

Thorpe did not know what the "van" might be, but he replaced the
tobacco on the sleigh.  In a few moments the task was finished,
with the exception of a half dozen other cases, which the driver
designated as also for the "van." The horses were unhitched, and
stabled in the third of the big log buildings.  The driver indicated
the second.

"Better go into the men's camp and sit down 'till th' boss gets
in," he advised.

Thorpe entered a dim, over-heated structure, lined on two sides
by a double tier of large bunks partitioned from one another like
cabins of boats, and centered by a huge stove over which hung
slender poles.  The latter were to dry clothes on.  Just outside
the bunks ran a straight hard bench.  Thorpe stood at the entrance
trying to accustom his eyes to the dimness.

"Set down," said a voice, "on th' floor if you want to; but I'd
prefer th' deacon seat."

Thorpe obediently took position on the bench, or "deacon seat."
His eyes, more used to the light, could make out a thin, tall, bent
old man, with bare cranium, two visible teeth, and a three days'
stubble of white beard over his meager, twisted face.

He caught, perhaps, Thorpe's surprised expression.

"You think th' old man's no good, do you?" he cackled, without the
slightest malice, "looks is deceivin'!"  He sprang up swiftly,
seized the toe of his right foot in his left hand, and jumped his
left foot through the loop thus formed.  Then he sat down again,
and laughed at Thorpe's astonishment.

"Old Jackson's still purty smart," said he.  "I'm barn-boss.  They
ain't a man in th' country knows as much about hosses as I do.  We
ain't had but two sick this fall, an' between you an' me, they's a
skate lot.  You're a greenhorn, ain't you?"

"Yes," confessed Thorpe.

"Well," said Jackson, reflectively but rapidly, "Le Fabian, he's
quiet but bad; and O'Grady, he talks loud but you can bluff him;
and Perry, he's only bad when he gets full of red likker; and Norton
he's bad when he gets mad like, and will use axes."

Thorpe did not know he was getting valuable points on the camp
bullies.  The old man hitched nearer and peered in his face.

"They don't bluff you a bit," he said, "unless you likes them,
and then they can back you way off the skidway."

Thorpe smiled at the old fellow's volubility.  He did not know
how near to the truth the woodsman's shrewdness had hit; for to
himself, as to most strong characters, his peculiarities were the
normal, and therefore the unnoticed.  His habit of thought in
respect to other people was rather objective than subjective.  He
inquired so impersonally the significance of whatever was before
him, that it lost the human quality both as to itself and himself.
To him men were things.  This attitude relieved him of self-
consciousness.  He never bothered his head as to what the other
man thought of him, his ignorance, or his awkwardness, simply
because to him the other man was nothing but an element in his
problem.  So in such circumstances he learned fast.  Once introduce
the human element, however, and his absurdly sensitive self-
consciousness asserted itself.  He was, as Jackson expressed it,
backed off the skidway.

At dark the old man lit two lamps, which served dimly to gloze the
shadows, and thrust logs of wood into the cast-iron stove.  Soon
after, the men came in.  They were a queer, mixed lot.  Some carried
the indisputable stamp of the frontiersman in their bearing and
glance; others looked to be mere day-laborers, capable of performing
whatever task they were set to, and of finding the trail home again.
There were active, clean-built, precise Frenchmen, with small hands
and feet, and a peculiarly trim way of wearing their rough garments;
typical native-born American lumber-jacks powerful in frame, rakish
in air, reckless in manner; big blonde Scandinavians and Swedes,
strong men at the sawing; an Indian or so, strangely in contrast to
the rest; and a variety of Irishmen, Englishmen, and Canadians.
These men tramped in without a word, and set busily to work at
various tasks.  Some sat on the "deacon seat" and began to take
off their socks and rubbers; others washed at a little wooden sink;
still others selected and lit lanterns from a pendant row near the
window, and followed old Jackson out of doors.  They were the
teamsters.

"You'll find the old man in the office," said Jackson.

Thorpe made his way across to the small log cabin indicated as the
office, and pushed open the door.  He found himself in a little room
containing two bunks, a stove, a counter and desk, and a number of
shelves full of supplies.  About the walls hung firearms, snowshoes,
and a variety of clothes.

A man sat at the desk placing figures on a sheet of paper.  He
obtained the figures from statistics pencilled on three thin leaves
of beech-wood riveted together.  In a chair by the stove lounged a
bulkier figure, which Thorpe concluded to be that of the "old man."

"I was sent here by Shearer," said Thorpe directly; "he said you
might give me some work."

So long a silence fell that the applicant began to wonder if his
question had been heard.

"I might," replied the man drily at last.

"Well, will you?" Thorpe inquired, the humor of the situation
overcoming him.

"Have you ever worked in the woods?"

"No."

The man smoked silently.

"I'll put you on the road in the morning," he concluded, as though
this were the deciding qualification.

One of the men entered abruptly and approached the counter.  The
writer at the desk laid aside his tablets.

"What is it, Albert?" he added.

"Jot of chewin'," was the reply.

The scaler took from the shelf a long plug of tobacco and cut off
two inches.

"Ain't hitting the van much, are you, Albert?" he commented, putting
the man's name and the amount in a little book.  Thorpe went out,
after leaving his name for the time book, enlightened as to the
method of obtaining supplies.  He promised himself some warm clothing
from the van, when he should have worked out the necessary credit.

At supper he learned something else,--that he must not talk at
table.  A moment's reflection taught him the common-sense of the
rule.  For one thing, supper was a much briefer affair than it
would have been had every man felt privileged to take his will in
conversation; not to speak of the absence of noise and the presence
of peace.  Each man asked for what he wanted.

"Please pass the beans," he said with the deliberate intonation
of a man who does not expect that his request will be granted.

Besides the beans were fried salt pork, boiled potatoes, canned
corn, mince pie, a variety of cookies and doughnuts, and strong
green tea.  Thorpe found himself eating ravenously of the crude fare.

That evening he underwent a catechism, a few practical jokes, which
he took good-naturedly, and a vast deal of chaffing.  At nine the
lights were all out.  By daylight he and a dozen other men were at
work, hewing a road that had to be as smooth and level as a New
York boulevard.



Chapter VI


Thorpe and four others were set to work on this road, which was
to be cut through a creek bottom leading, he was told, to "seventeen."
The figures meant nothing to him.  Later, each number came to possess
an individuality of its own.  He learned to use a double-bitted ax.

Thorpe's intelligence was of the practical sort that wonderfully
helps experience.  He watched closely one of the older men, and
analyzed the relation borne by each one of his movements to the
object in view.  In a short time he perceived that one hand and arm
are mere continuations of the helve, attaching the blade of the ax
to the shoulder of the wielder; and that the other hand directs the
stroke.  He acquired the knack thus of throwing the bit of steel into
the gash as though it were a baseball on the end of a string; and so
accomplished power.  By experiment he learned just when to slide the
guiding hand down the helve; and so gained accuracy.  He suffered
none of those accidents so common to new choppers.  His ax did not
twist itself from his hands, nor glance to cut his foot.  He
attained the method of the double bit, and how to knock roots by
alternate employment of the edge and flat.  In a few days his hands
became hard and used to the cold.

From shortly after daylight he worked.  Four other men bore him
company, and twice Radway himself came by, watched their operations
for a moment, and moved on without comment.  After Thorpe had caught
his second wind, he enjoyed his task, proving a certain pleasure in
the ease with which he handled his tool.

At the end of an interminable period, a faint, musical halloo
swelled, echoed, and died through the forest, beautiful as a
spirit.  It was taken up by another voice and repeated.  Then by
another.  Now near at hand, now far away it rang as hollow as a
bell.  The sawyers, the swampers, the skidders, and the team men
turned and put on their heavy blanket coats.

Down on the road Thorpe heard it too, and wondered what it might be.

"Come on, Bub! she means chew!" explained old man Heath kindly.
Old man Heath was a veteran woodsman who had come to swamping in
his old age.  He knew the game thoroughly, but could never save
his "stake" when Pat McGinnis, the saloon man, enticed him in.
Throughout the morning he had kept an eye on the newcomer, and was
secretly pleased in his heart of the professional at the readiness
with which the young fellow learned.

Thorpe resumed his coat, and fell in behind the little procession.
After a short time he came upon a horse and sledge.  Beyond it the
cookee had built a little camp fire, around and over which he had
grouped big fifty-pound lard-tins, half full of hot things to eat.
Each man, as he approached, picked up a tin plate and cup from a
pile near at hand.

The cookee was plainly master of the situation.  He issued peremptory
orders.  When Erickson, the blonde Swede, attempted surreptitiously
to appropriate a doughnut, the youth turned on him savagely.

"Get out of that, you big tow-head!" he cried with an oath.

A dozen Canada jays, fluffy, impatient, perched near by or made
little short circles over and back.  They awaited the remains of
the dinner.  Bob Stratton and a devil-may-care giant by the name of
Nolan constructed a joke wherewith to amuse the interim.  They cut a
long pole, and placed it across a log and through a bush, so that
one extremity projected beyond the bush.  Then diplomacy won a piece
of meat from the cookee.  This they nailed to the end of the pole by
means of a pine sliver.  The Canada jays gazed on the morsel with
covetous eyes.  When the men had retired, they swooped.  One big
fellow arrived first, and lit in defiance of the rest.

"Give it to 'im!" whispered Nolan, who had been watching.

Bob hit the other end of the pole a mighty whack with his ax.  The
astonished jay, projected straight upward by the shock, gave a
startled squawk and cut a hole through the air for the tall timber.
Stratton and Nolan went into convulsions of laughter.

"Get at it!" cried the cookee, as though setting a pack of dogs on
their prey.

The men ate, perched in various attitudes and places.  Thorpe found
it difficult to keep warm.  The violent exercise had heated him
through, and now the north country cold penetrated to his bones.
He huddled close to the fire, and drank hot tea, but it did not do
him very much good.  In his secret mind he resolved to buy one of
the blanket mackinaws that very evening.  He began to see that the
costumes of each country have their origin in practicality.

That evening he picked out one of the best.  As he was about to
inquire the price, Radway drew the van book toward him, inquiring,

"Let's see; what's the name?"

In an instant Thorpe was charged on the book with three dollars and
a half, although his work that day had earned him less than a
dollar.  On his way back to the men's shanty he could not help
thinking how easy it would be for him to leave the next morning two
dollars and a half ahead.  He wondered if this method of procedure
obtained in all the camps.

The newcomer's first day of hard work had tired him completely.  He
was ready for nothing so much as his bunk.  But he had forgotten
that it was Saturday night.  His status was still to assure.

They began with a few mild tricks.  Shuffle the Brogan followed
Hot Back.  Thorpe took all of it good-naturedly.  Finally a tall
individual with a thin white face, a reptilian forehead, reddish
hair, and long baboon arms, suggested tossing in a blanket.  Thorpe
looked at the low ceiling, and declined.

"I'm with the game as long as you say, boys," said he, "and I'll
have as much fun as anybody, but that's going too far for a tired
man."

The reptilian gentleman let out a string of oaths whose meaning
might be translated, "We'll see about that!"

Thorpe was a good boxer, but he knew by now the lumber-jack's
method of fighting,--anything to hurt the other fellow.  And in a
genuine old-fashioned knock-down-and-drag-out rough-and-tumble your
woodsman is about the toughest customer to handle you will be likely
to meet.  He is brought up on fighting.  Nothing pleases him better
than to get drunk and, with a few companions, to embark on an
earnest effort to "clean out" a rival town.  And he will accept
cheerfully punishment enough to kill three ordinary men.  It takes
one of his kind really to hurt him.

Thorpe, at the first hostile movement, sprang back to the door,
seized one of the three-foot billets of hardwood intended for the
stove, and faced his opponents.

"I don't know which of you boys is coming first," said he quietly,
"but he's going to get it good and plenty."

If the affair had been serious, these men would never have recoiled
before the mere danger of a stick of hardwood.  The American woodsman
is afraid of nothing human.  But this was a good-natured bit of
foolery, a test of nerve, and there was no object in getting a
broken head for that.  The reptilian gentleman alone grumbled at
the abandonment of the attack, mumbling something profane.

"If you hanker for trouble so much," drawled the unexpected voice
of old Jackson from the corner, "mebbe you could put on th' gloves."

The idea was acclaimed.  Somebody tossed out a dirty torn old set of
buckskin boxing gloves.

The rest was farce.  Thorpe was built on the true athletic lines,
broad, straight shoulders, narrow flanks, long, clean, smooth
muscles.  He possessed, besides, that hereditary toughness and bulk
which no gymnasium training will ever quite supply.  The other man,
while powerful and ugly in his rushes, was clumsy and did not use
his head.  Thorpe planted his hard straight blows at will.  In this
game he was as manifestly superior as his opponent would probably
have been had the rules permitted kicking, gouging, and wrestling.
Finally he saw his opening and let out with a swinging pivot blow.
The other picked himself out of a corner, and drew off the gloves.
Thorpe's status was assured.

A Frenchman took down his fiddle and began to squeak.  In the course
of the dance old Jackson and old Heath found themselves together,
smoking their pipes of Peerless.

"The young feller's all right," observed Heath; "he cuffed Ben up
to a peak all right."

"Went down like a peck of wet fish-nets," replied Jackson tranquilly.



Chapter VII


In the office shanty one evening about a week later, Radway and
his scaler happened to be talking over the situation.  The scaler,
whose name was Dyer, slouched back in the shadow, watching his great
honest superior as a crafty, dainty cat might watch the blunderings
of a St. Bernard.  When he spoke, it was with a mockery so subtle as
quite to escape the perceptions of the lumberman.  Dyer had a precise
little black mustache whose ends he was constantly twisting into
points, black eyebrows, and long effeminate black lashes.  You would
have expected his dress in the city to be just a trifle flashy, not
enough so to be loud, but sinning as to the trifles of good taste.
The two men conversed in short elliptical sentences, using many
technical terms.

"That 'seventeen' white pine is going to underrun," said Dyer.  "It
won't skid over three hundred thousand."

"It's small stuff," agreed Radway, "and so much the worse for us;
but the Company'll stand in on it because small stuff like that
always over-runs on the mill-cut."

The scaler nodded comprehension.

"When you going to dray-haul that Norway across Pike Lake?"

"To-morrow.  She's springy, but the books say five inches of ice
will hold a team, and there's more than that.  How much are we
putting in a day, now?"

"About forty thousand."

Radway fell silent.

"That's mighty little for such a crew," he observed at last,
doubtfully.

"I always said you were too easy with them.  You got to drive them
more."

"Well, it's a rough country," apologized Radway, trying, as was
his custom, to find excuses for the other party as soon as he was
agreed with in his blame, "there's any amount of potholes; and, then,
we've had so much snow the ground ain't really froze underneath.  It
gets pretty soft in some of them swamps.  Can't figure on putting up
as much in this country as we used to down on the Muskegon."

The scaler smiled a thin smile all to himself behind the stove.  Big
John Radway depended so much on the moral effect of approval or
disapproval by those with whom he lived.  It amused Dyer to withhold
the timely word, so leaving the jobber to flounder between his easy
nature and his sense of what should be done.

Dyer knew perfectly well that the work was behind, and he knew the
reason.  For some time the men had been relaxing their efforts.
They had worked honestly enough, but a certain snap and vim had
lacked.  This was because Radway had been too easy on them.

Your true lumber-jack adores of all things in creation a man whom he
feels to be stronger than himself.  If his employer is big enough to
drive him, then he is willing to be driven to the last ounce of his
strength.  But once he gets the notion that his "boss" is afraid
of, or for, him or his feelings or his health, he loses interest in
working for that man.  So a little effort to lighten or expedite his
work, a little leniency in excusing the dilatory finishing of a
job, a little easing-up under stress of weather, are taken as so
many indications of a desire to conciliate.  And conciliation means
weakness every time.  Your lumber-jack likes to be met front to
front, one strong man to another.  As you value your authority, the
love of your men, and the completion of your work, keep a bluff
brow and an unbending singleness of purpose.

Radway's peculiar temperament rendered him liable to just this
mistake.  It was so much easier for him to do the thing himself
than to be harsh to the point of forcing another to it, that he was
inclined to take the line of least resistance when it came to a
question of even ordinary diligence.  He sought often in his own
mind excuses for dereliction in favor of a man who would not have
dreamed of seeking them for himself.  A good many people would call
this kindness of heart.  Perhaps it was; the question is a little
puzzling.  But the facts were as stated.

Thorpe had already commented on the feeling among the men, though,
owing to his inexperience, he was not able to estimate its full
value.  The men were inclined to a semi-apologetic air when they
spoke of their connection with the camp.  Instead of being honored
as one of a series of jobs, this seemed to be considered as merely
a temporary halting-place in which they took no pride, and from
which they looked forward in anticipation or back in memory to
better things.

"Old Shearer, he's the bully boy," said Bob Stratton.  "I remember
when he was foremap for M. & D. at Camp 0.  Say, we did hustle them
saw-logs in!  I should rise to remark!  Out in th' woods by first
streak o' day.  I recall one mornin' she was pretty cold, an' the
boys grumbled some about turnin' out.  'Cold,' says Tim, 'you sons
of guns! You got your ch'ice.  It may be too cold for you in the
woods, but it's a damm sight too hot fer you in hell, an' you're
going to one or the other!'  And he meant it too.  Them was great
days!  Forty million a year, and not a hitch."

One man said nothing in the general discussion.  It was his first
winter in the woods, and plainly in the eyes of the veterans this
experience did not count.  It was a "faute de mieux," in which one
would give an honest day's work, and no more.

As has been hinted, even the inexperienced newcomer noticed the
lack of enthusiasm, of unity.  Had he known the loyalty, devotion,
and adoration that a thoroughly competent man wins from his "hands,"
the state of affairs would have seemed even more surprising.  The
lumber-jack will work sixteen, eighteen hours a day, sometimes up
to the waist in water full of floating ice; sleep wet on the ground
by a little fire; and then next morning will spring to work at
daylight with an "Oh, no, not tired; just a little stiff, sir!" in
cheerful reply to his master's inquiry,--for the right man!  Only it
must be a strong man,--with the strength of the wilderness in his eye.

The next morning Radway transferred Molly and Jenny, with little
Fabian Laveque and two of the younger men, to Pike Lake.  There,
earlier in the season, a number of pines had been felled out on the
ice, cut in logs, and left in expectation of ice thick enough to
bear the travoy "dray."  Owing to the fact that the shores of Pike
Lake were extremely precipitous, it had been impossible to travoy
the logs up over the hill.

Radway had sounded carefully the thickness of the ice with an ax.
Although the weather had of late been sufficiently cold for the
time of year, the snow, as often happens, had fallen before the
temperature.  Under the warm white blanket, the actual freezing
had been slight.  However, there seemed to be at least eight inches
of clear ice, which would suffice.

Some of the logs in question were found to be half imbedded in the
ice.  It became necessary first of all to free them.  Young Henrys
cut a strong bar six or eight feet long, while Pat McGuire chopped
a hole alongside the log.  Then one end of the bar was thrust into
the hole, the logging chain fastened to the other; and, behold, a
monster lever, whose fulcrum was the ice and whose power was applied
by Molly, hitched to the end of the chain.  In this simple manner a
task was accomplished in five minutes which would have taken a dozen
men an hour.  When the log had been cat-a-cornered from its bed, the
chain was fastened around one end by means of the ever-useful steel
swamp-hook, and it was yanked across the dray.  Then the travoy took
its careful way across the ice to where a dip in the shore gave
access to a skidway.

Four logs had thus been safely hauled.  The fifth was on its journey
across the lake.  Suddenly without warning, and with scarcely a
sound, both horses sank through the ice, which bubbled up around
them and over their backs in irregular rotted pieces.  Little Fabian
Laveque shouted, and jumped down from his log.  Pat McGuire and
young Henrys came running.

The horses had broken through an air-hole, about which the ice was
strong.  Fabian had already seized Molly by the bit, and was holding
her head easily above water.

"Kitch Jenny by dat he't!" he cried to Pat.

Thus the two men, without exertion, sustained the noses of the team
above the surface.  The position demanded absolutely no haste, for it
could have been maintained for a good half hour.  Molly and Jenny,
their soft eyes full of the intelligence of the situation, rested
easily in full confidence.  But Pat and Henrys, new to this sort of
emergency, were badly frightened and excited.  To them the affair
had come to a deadlock.

"Oh, Lord!" cried Pat, clinging desperately to Jenny's headpiece.
"What will we'z be doin'?  We can't niver haul them two horses on
the ice."

"Tak' de log-chain," said Fabian to Henrys, "an' tie him around
de nec' of Jenny."

Henrys, after much difficulty and nervous fumbling, managed to
loosen the swamp-hook; and after much more difficulty and nervous
fumbling succeeded in making it fast about the gray mare's neck.
Fabian intended with this to choke the animal to that peculiar
state when she would float like a balloon on the water, and two
men could with ease draw her over the edge of the ice.  Then the
unexpected happened.

The instant Henrys had passed the end of the chain through the
knot, Pat, possessed by some Hibernian notion that now all was
fast, let go of the bit.  Jenny's head at once went under, and
the end of the logging chain glided over the ice and fell plump
in the hole.

Immediately all was confusion.  Jenny kicked and struggled, churning
the water, throwing it about, kicking out in every direction.  Once a
horse's head dips strongly, the game is over.  No animal drowns more
quickly.  The two young boys scrambled away, and French oaths could
not induce them to approach.  Molly, still upheld by Fabian, looked
at him piteously with her strange intelligent eyes, holding herself
motionless and rigid with complete confidence in this master who had
never failed her before.  Fabian dug his heels into the ice, but
could not hang on.  The drowning horse was more than a dead weight.
Presently it became a question of letting go or being dragged into
the lake on top of the animals.  With a sob the little Frenchman
relinquished his hold.  The water seemed slowly to rise and over-
film the troubled look of pleading in Molly's eyes.

"Assassins!" hissed Laveque at the two unfortunate youths.  That
was all.

When the surface of the waters had again mirrored the clouds, they
hauled the carcasses out on the ice and stripped the harness.  Then
they rolled the log from the dray, piled the tools on it, and took
their way to camp.  In the blue of the winter's sky was a single
speck.

The speck grew.  Soon it swooped.  With a hoarse croak it lit on
the snow at a wary distance, and began to strut back and forth.
Presently, its suspicions at rest, the raven advanced, and with
eager beak began its dreadful meal.  By this time another, which
had seen the first one's swoop, was in view through the ether; then
another; then another.  In an hour the brotherhood of ravens, thus
telegraphically notified, was at feast.



Chapter VIII


Fabian Laveque elaborated the details of the catastrophe with
volubility.

"Hee's not fonny dat she bre'ks t'rough," he said.  "I 'ave see
dem bre'k t'rough two, t'ree tam in de day, but nevaire dat she
get drown!  W'en dose dam-fool can't t'ink wit' hees haid--sacre
Dieu! eet is so easy, to chok' dat cheval--she make me cry wit'
de eye!"

"I suppose it was a good deal my fault," commented Radway, doubtfully
shaking his head, after Laveque had left the office.  "I ought to
have been surer about the ice."

"Eight inches is a little light, with so much snow atop," remarked
the scaler carelessly.

By virtue of that same careless remark, however, Radway was so
confirmed in his belief as to his own culpability that he quite
overlooked Fabian's just contention--that the mere thinness of the
ice was in reality no excuse for the losing of the horses.  So Pat
and Henrys were not discharged--were not instructed to "get their
time."  Fabian Laveque promptly demanded his.

"Sacre bleu!" said he to old Jackson.  "I no work wid dat dam-fool
dat no t'ink wit' hees haid."

This deprived the camp at once of a teamster and a team.  When you
reflect that one pair of horses takes care of the exertions of a
crew of sawyers, several swampers, and three or four cant-hook men,
you will readily see what a serious derangement their loss would
cause.  And besides, the animals themselves are difficult to replace.
They are big strong beasts, selected for their power, staying
qualities, and intelligence, worth anywhere from three to six
hundred dollars a pair.  They must be shipped in from a distance.
And, finally, they require a very careful and patient training
before they are of value in co-operating with the nicely adjusted
efforts necessary to place the sawlog where it belongs.  Ready-
trained horses are never for sale during the season.

Radway did his best.  He took three days to search out a big team
of farm horses.  Then it became necessary to find a driver.  After
some deliberation he decided to advance Bob Stratton to the post,
that "decker" having had more or less experience the year before.
Erickson, the Swede, while not a star cant-hook man, was nevertheless
sure and reliable.  Radway placed him in Stratton's place.  But now
he must find a swamper.  He remembered Thorpe.

So the young man received his first promotion toward the ranks of
skilled labor.  He gained at last a field of application for the
accuracy he had so intelligently acquired while road-making, for
now a false stroke marred a saw-log; and besides, what was more to
his taste, he found himself near the actual scene of operation, at
the front, as it were.  He had under his very eyes the process as
far as it had been carried.

In his experience here he made use of the same searching analytical
observation that had so quickly taught him the secret of the ax-
swing.  He knew that each of the things he saw, no matter how
trivial, was either premeditated or the product of chance.  If
premeditated, he tried to find out its reason for being.  If
fortuitous, he wished to know the fact, and always attempted to
figure out the possibility of its elimination.

So he learned why and when the sawyers threw a tree up or down
hill; how much small standing timber they tried to fell it through;
what consideration held for the cutting of different lengths of log;
how the timber was skilfully decked on the skids in such a manner
that the pile should not bulge and fall, and so that the scaler
could easily determine the opposite ends of the same log;--in short,
a thousand and one little details which ordinarily a man learns only
as the exigencies arise to call in experience.  Here, too, he first
realized he was in the firing line.

Thorpe had assigned him as bunk mate the young fellow who assisted
Tom Broadhead in the felling.  Henry Paul was a fresh-complexioned,
clear-eyed, quick-mannered young fellow with an air of steady
responsibility about him.  He came from the southern part of the
State, where, during the summer, he worked on a little homestead
farm of his own.  After a few days he told Thorpe that he was
married, and after a few days more he showed his bunk mate the
photograph of a sweet-faced young woman who looked trustingly out
of the picture.

"She's waitin' down there for me, and it ain't so very long till
spring," said Paul wistfully.  "She's the best little woman a man
ever had, and there ain't nothin' too good for her, chummy!"

Thorpe, soul-sick after his recent experiences with the charity of
the world, discovered a real pleasure in this fresh, clear passion.
As he contemplated the abounding health, the upright carriage, the
sparkling, bubbling spirits of the young woodsman, he could easily
imagine the young girl and the young happiness, too big for a
little backwoods farm.

Three days after the newcomer had started in at the swamping, Paul,
during their early morning walk from camp to the scene of their
operations, confided in him further.

"Got another letter, chummy," said he, "come in yesterday.  She
tells me," he hesitated with a blush, and then a happy laugh, "that
they ain't going to be only two of us at the farm next year."

"You mean!" queried Thorpe.

"Yes," laughed Paul, "and if it's a girl she gets named after her
mother, you bet."

The men separated.  In a moment Thorpe found himself waist-deep in
the pitchy aromatic top of an old bull-sap, clipping away at the
projecting branches.  After a time he heard Paul's gay halloo.

"TimBER!" came the cry, and then the swish-sh-sh,--CRASH of the
tree's fall.

Thorpe knew that now either Hank or Tom must be climbing with the
long measuring pole along the prostrate trunk, marking by means of
shallow ax-clips where the saw was to divide the logs.  Then Tom
shouted something unintelligible.  The other men seemed to understand,
however, for they dropped their work and ran hastily in the direction
of the voice.  Thorpe, after a moment's indecision, did the same.
He arrived to find a group about a prostrate man.  The man was Paul.

Two of the older woodsmen, kneeling, were conducting coolly a hasty
examination.  At the front every man is more or less of a surgeon.

"Is he hurt badly?" asked Thorpe; "what is it?"

"He's dead," answered one of the other men soberly.

With the skill of ghastly practice some of them wove a litter on
which the body was placed.  The pathetic little procession moved in
the solemn, inscrutable forest.

When the tree had fallen it had crashed through the top of another,
leaving suspended in the branches of the latter a long heavy limb.
A slight breeze dislodged it.  Henry Paul was impaled as by a javelin.

This is the chief of the many perils of the woods.  Like crouching
pumas the instruments of a man's destruction poise on the spring,
sometimes for days.  Then swiftly, silently, the leap is made.  It
is a danger unavoidable, terrible, ever-present.  Thorpe was destined
in time to see men crushed and mangled in a hundred ingenious ways
by the saw log, knocked into space and a violent death by the butts
of trees, ground to powder in the mill of a jam, but never would he
be more deeply impressed than by this ruthless silent taking of a
life.  The forces of nature are so tame, so simple, so obedient;
and in the next instant so absolutely beyond human control or
direction, so whirlingly contemptuous of puny human effort, that
in time the wilderness shrouds itself to our eyes in the same
impenetrable mystery as the sea.

That evening the camp was unusually quiet.  Tellier let his
fiddle hang.  After supper Thorpe was approached by Purdy, the
reptilian red-head with whom he had had the row some evenings
before.

"You in, chummy?" he asked in a quiet voice.  "It's a five apiece
for Hank's woman."

"Yes," said Thorpe.

The men were earning from twenty to thirty dollars a month.  They
had, most of them, never seen Hank Paul before this autumn.  He
had not, mainly because of his modest disposition, enjoyed any
extraordinary degree of popularity.  Yet these strangers cheerfully,
as a matter of course, gave up the proceeds of a week's hard work,
and that without expecting the slightest personal credit.  The money
was sent "from the boys."  Thorpe later read a heart-broken letter
of thanks to the unknown benefactors.  It touched him deeply, and
he suspected the other men of the same emotions, but by that time
they had regained the independent, self-contained poise of the
frontiersman.  They read it with unmoved faces, and tossed it aside
with a more than ordinarily rough joke or oath.  Thorpe understood
their reticence.  It was a part of his own nature.  He felt more
than ever akin to these men.

As swamper he had more or less to do with a cant-hook in helping
the teamsters roll the end of the log on the little "dray."  He
soon caught the knack.  Towards Christmas he had become a fairly
efficient cant-hook man, and was helping roll the great sticks of
timber up the slanting skids.  Thus always intelligence counts,
especially that rare intelligence which resolves into the analytical
and the minutely observing.

On Sundays Thorpe fell into the habit of accompanying old Jackson
Hines on his hunting expeditions.  The ancient had been raised in
the woods.  He seemed to know by instinct the haunts and habits of
all the wild animals, just as he seemed to know by instinct when
one of his horses was likely to be troubled by the colic.  His
woodcraft was really remarkable.

So the two would stand for hours in the early morning and late
evening waiting for deer on the edges of the swamps.  They haunted
the runways during the middle of the day.  On soft moccasined feet
they stole about in the evening with a bull's-eye lantern fastened
on the head of one of them for a "jack."  Several times they
surprised the wolves, and shone the animals' eyes like the
scattered embers of a camp fire.

Thorpe learned to shoot at a deer's shoulders rather than his heart,
how to tell when the animal had sustained a mortal hurt from the
way it leaped and the white of its tail.  He even made progress
in the difficult art of still hunting, where the man matches his
senses against those of the creatures of the forest,--and sometimes
wins.  He soon knew better than to cut the animal's throat, and
learned from Hines that a single stab at a certain point of the
chest was much better for the purposes of bleeding.  And, what is
more, he learned not to over-shoot down hill.

Besides these things Jackson taught him many other, minor, details
of woodcraft.  Soon the young man could interpret the thousands of
signs, so insignificant in appearance and so important in reality,
which tell the history of the woods.  He acquired the knack of
winter fishing.

These Sundays were perhaps the most nearly perfect of any of the
days of that winter.  In them the young man drew more directly face
to face with the wilderness.  He called a truce with the enemy;
and in return that great inscrutable power poured into his heart
a portion of her grandeur.  His ambition grew; and, as always with
him, his determination became the greater and the more secret.  In
proportion as his ideas increased, he took greater pains to shut
them in from expression.  For failure in great things would bring
keener disappointment than failure in little.

He was getting just the experience and the knowledge he needed; but
that was about all.  His wages were twenty-five dollars a month,
which his van bill would reduce to the double eagle.  At the end
of the winter he would have but a little over a hundred dollars to
show for his season's work, and this could mean at most only fifty
dollars for Helen.  But the future was his.  He saw now more plainly
what he had dimly perceived before, that for the man who buys timber,
and logs it well, a sure future is waiting.  And in this camp he was
beginning to learn from failure the conditions of success.



Chapter IX


They finished cutting on section seventeen during Thorpe's second
week.  It became necessary to begin on section fourteen, which lay
two miles to the east.  In that direction the character of the
country changed somewhat.

The pine there grew thick on isolated "islands" of not more than
an acre or so in extent,--little knolls rising from the level of a
marsh.  In ordinary conditions nothing would have been easier than
to have ploughed roads across the frozen surface of this marsh.  The
peculiar state of the weather interposed tremendous difficulties.

The early part of autumn had been characterized by a heavy snow-
fall immediately after a series of mild days.  A warm blanket of
some thickness thus overlaid the earth, effectually preventing the
freezing which subsequent cold weather would have caused.  All
the season Radway had contended with this condition.  Even in the
woods, muddy swamp and spring-holes caused endless difficulty and
necessitated a great deal of "corduroying," or the laying of poles
side by side to form an artificial bottom.  Here in the open some
six inches of water and unlimited mud awaited the first horse that
should break through the layer of snow and thin ice.  Between each
pair of islands a road had to be "tramped."

Thorpe and the rest were put at this disagreeable job.  All day long
they had to walk mechanically back and forth on diagonals between
the marks set by Radway with his snowshoes.  Early in the morning
their feet were wet by icy water, for even the light weight of a
man sometimes broke the frozen skin of the marsh.  By night a road
of trampled snow, of greater or less length, was marked out across
the expanse.  Thus the blanket was thrown back from the warm earth,
and thus the cold was given a chance at the water beneath.  In a
day or so the road would bear a horse.  A bridge of ice had been
artificially constructed, on either side of which lay unsounded
depths.  This road was indicated by a row of firs stuck in the snow
on either side.

It was very cold.  All day long the restless wind swept across the
shivering surface of the plains, and tore around the corners of the
islands.  The big woods are as good as an overcoat.  The overcoat
had been taken away.

When the lunch-sleigh arrived, the men huddled shivering in the lee
of one of the knolls, and tried to eat with benumbed fingers before
a fire that was but a mockery.  Often it was nearly dark before their
work had warmed them again.  All of the skidways had to be placed on
the edges of the islands themselves, and the logs had to be travoyed
over the steep little knolls.  A single misstep out on to the plain
meant a mired horse.  Three times heavy snows obliterated the roads,
so that they had to be ploughed out before the men could go to work
again.  It was a struggle.

Radway was evidently worried.  He often paused before a gang to
inquire how they were "making it."  He seemed afraid they might
wish to quit, which was indeed the case, but he should never have
taken before them any attitude but that of absolute confidence in
their intentions.  His anxiety was natural, however.  He realized
the absolute necessity of skidding and hauling this job before the
heavy choking snows of the latter part of January should make it
impossible to keep the roads open.  So insistent was this necessity
that he had seized the first respite in the phenomenal snow-fall of
the early autumn to begin work.  The cutting in the woods could wait.

Left to themselves probably the men would never have dreamed of
objecting to whatever privations the task carried with it.  Radway's
anxiety for their comfort, however, caused them finally to imagine
that perhaps they might have some just grounds for complaint after
all.  That is a great trait of the lumber-jack.

But Dyer, the scaler, finally caused the outbreak.  Dyer was an
efficient enough man in his way, but he loved his own ease.  His
habit was to stay in his bunk of mornings until well after daylight.
To this there could be no objection--except on the part of the cook,
who was supposed to attend to his business himself--for the scaler
was active in his work, when once he began it, and could keep up
with the skidding.  But now he displayed a strong antipathy to the
north wind on the plains.  Of course he could not very well shirk
the work entirely, but he did a good deal of talking on the very
cold mornings.

"I don't pose for no tough son-of-a-gun," said he to Radway, "and
I've got some respect for my ears and feet.  She'll warm up a little
by to-morrow, and perhaps the wind'll die.  I can catch up on you
fellows by hustling a little, so I guess I'll stay in and work on
the books to-day."

"All right," Radway assented, a little doubtfully.

This happened perhaps two days out of the week.  Finally Dyer hung
out a thermometer, which he used to consult.  The men saw it, and
consulted it too.  At once they felt much colder.

"She was stan' ten below," sputtered Baptiste Tellier, the Frenchman
who played the fiddle.  "He freeze t'rou to hees eenside.  Dat is
too cole for mak de work."

"Them plains is sure a holy fright," assented Purdy.

"Th' old man knows it himself," agreed big Nolan; "did you see him
rammin' around yesterday askin' us if we found her too cold?  He
knows damn well he ought not to keep a man out that sort o' weather."

"You'd shiver like a dog in a briar path on a warm day in July,"
said Jackson Hines contemptuously.

"Shut up!" said they.  "You're barn-boss.  You don't have to be out
in th' cold."

This was true.  So Jackson's intervention went for a little worse
than nothing.

"It ain't lak' he has nuttin' besides," went on Baptiste.  "He can
mak' de cut in de meedle of de fores'."

"That's right," agreed Bob Stratton, "they's the west half of eight
ain't been cut yet."

So they sent a delegation to Radway.  Big Nolan was the spokesman.

"Boss," said he bluntly, "she's too cold to work on them plains
to-day.  She's the coldest day we had."

Radway was too old a hand at the business to make any promises on
the spot.

"I'll see, boys," said he.

When the breakfast was over the crew were set to making skidways
and travoy roads on eight.  This was a precedent.  In time the work
on the plains was grumblingly done in any weather.  However, as to
this Radway proved firm enough.  He was a good fighter when he knew
he was being imposed on.  A man could never cheat or defy him openly
without collecting a little war that left him surprised at the
jobber's belligerency.  The doubtful cases, those on the subtle line
of indecision, found him weak.  He could be so easily persuaded that
he was in the wrong.  At times it even seemed that he was anxious to
be proved at fault, so eager was he to catch fairly the justice of
the other man's attitude.  He held his men inexorably and firmly to
their work on the indisputably comfortable days; but gave in often
when an able-bodied woodsman should have seen in the weather no
inconvenience, even.  As the days slipped by, however, he tightened
the reins.  Christmas was approaching.  An easy mathematical
computation reduced the question of completing his contract with
Morrison & Daly to a certain weekly quota.  In fact he was surprised
at the size of it.  He would have to work diligently and steadily
during the rest of the winter.

Having thus a definite task to accomplish in a definite number of
days, Radway grew to be more of a taskmaster.  His anxiety as to
the completion of the work overlaid his morbidly sympathetic human
interest.  Thus he regained to a small degree the respect of his
men.  Then he lost it again.

One morning he came in from a talk with the supply-teamster, and
woke Dyer, who was not yet up.

"I'm going down home for two or three weeks," he announced to Dyer,
"you know my address.  You'll have to take charge, and I guess
you'd better let the scaling go.  We can get the tally at the
banking grounds when we begin to haul.  Now we ain't got all the
time there is, so you want to keep the boys at it pretty well."

Dyer twisted the little points of his mustache.  "All right, sir,"
said he with his smile so inscrutably insolent that Radway never
saw the insolence at all.  He thought this a poor year for a man
in Radway's position to spend Christmas with his family, but it
was none of his business.

"Do as much as you can in the marsh, Dyer," went on the jobber.
"I don't believe it's really necessary to lay off any more there
on account of the weather.  We've simply got to get that job in
before the big snows."

"All right, sir," repeated Dyer.

The scaler did what he considered his duty.  All day long he tramped
back and forth from one gang of men to the other, keeping a sharp
eye on the details of the work.  His practical experience was
sufficient to solve readily such problems of broken tackle, extra
expedients, or facility which the days brought forth.  The fact that
in him was vested the power to discharge kept the men at work.

Dyer was in the habit of starting for the marsh an hour or so after
sunrise.  The crew, of course, were at work by daylight.  Dyer heard
them often through his doze, just as he heard the chore-boy come in
to build the fire and fill the water pail afresh.  After a time the
fire, built of kerosene and pitchy jack pine, would get so hot that
in self-defense he would arise and dress.  Then he would breakfast
leisurely.

Thus he incurred the enmity of the cook and cookee.  Those
individuals have to prepare food three times a day for a half
hundred heavy eaters; besides which, on sleigh-haul, they are
supposed to serve a breakfast at three o'clock for the loaders
and a variety of lunches up to midnight for the sprinkler men.
As a consequence, they resent infractions of the little system
they may have been able to introduce.

Now the business of a foreman is to be up as soon as anybody.  He
does none of the work himself, but he must see that somebody else
does it, and does it well.  For this he needs actual experience
at the work itself, but above all zeal and constant presence.  He
must know how a thing ought to be done, and he must be on hand
unexpectedly to see how its accomplishment is progressing.  Dyer
should have been out of bed at first horn-blow.

One morning he slept until nearly ten o'clock.  It was inexplicable!
He hurried from his bunk, made a hasty toilet, and started for the
dining-room to get some sort of a lunch to do him until dinner
time.  As he stepped from the door of the office he caught sight of
two men hurrying from the cook camp to the men's camp.  He thought
he heard the hum of conversation in the latter building.  The cookee
set hot coffee before him.  For the rest, he took what he could find
cold on the table.

On an inverted cracker box the cook sat reading an old copy of the
Police Gazette.  Various fifty-pound lard tins were bubbling and
steaming on the range.  The cookee divided his time between them
and the task of sticking on the log walls pleasing patterns made
of illustrations from cheap papers and the gaudy labels of canned
goods.  Dyer sat down, feeling, for the first time, a little guilty.
This was not because of a sense of a dereliction in duty, but
because he feared the strong man's contempt for inefficiency.

"I sort of pounded my ear a little long this morning," he remarked
with an unwonted air of bonhomie.

The cook creased his paper with one hand and went on reading; the
little action indicating at the same time that he had heard, but
intended to vouchsafe no attention.  The cookee continued his
occupations.

"I suppose the men got out to the marsh on time," suggested Dyer,
still easily.

The cook laid aside his paper and looked the scaler in the eye.

"You're the foreman; I'm the cook," said he.  "You ought to know."

The cookee had paused, the paste brush in his hand.

Dyer was no weakling.  The problem presenting, he rose to the
emergency.  Without another word he pushed back his coffee cup
and crossed the narrow open passage to the men's camp

When he opened the door a silence fell.  He could see dimly that
the room was full of lounging and smoking lumbermen.  As a matter
of fact, not a man had stirred out that morning.  This was more for
the sake of giving Dyer a lesson than of actually shirking the work,
for a lumber-jack is honest in giving his time when it is paid for.

"How's this, men!" cried Dyer sharply; "why aren't you out on
the marsh?"

No one answered for a minute.  Then Baptiste:

"He mak' too tam cole for de marsh.  Meester Radway he spik dat we
kip off dat marsh w'en he mak' cole."

Dyer knew that the precedent was indisputable.

"Why didn't you cut on eight then?" he asked, still in peremptory
tones.

"Didn't have no one to show us where to begin," drawled a voice in
the corner.

Dyer turned sharp on his heel and went out.

"Sore as a boil, ain't he!" commented old Jackson Hines with a
chuckle.

In the cook camp Dyer was saying to the cook, "Well, anyway, we'll
have dinner early and get a good start for this afternoon."

The cook again laid down his paper.  "I'm tending to this job of
cook," said he, "and I'm getting the meals on time.  Dinner will
be on time to-day not a minute early, and not a minute late."

Then he resumed his perusal of the adventures of ladies to whom the
illustrations accorded magnificent calf-development.

The crew worked on the marsh that afternoon, and the subsequent
days of the week.  They labored conscientiously but not zealously.
There is a deal of difference, and the lumber-jack's unaided
conscience is likely to allow him a certain amount of conversation
from the decks of skidways.  The work moved slowly.  At Christmas
a number of the men "went out."  Most of them were back again after
four or five days, for, while men were not plenty, neither was work.
The equilibrium was nearly exact.

But the convivial souls had lost to Dyer the days of their debauch,
and until their thirst for recuperative "Pain Killer," "Hinckley"
and Jamaica Ginger was appeased, they were not much good.  Instead
of keeping up to fifty thousand a day, as Radway had figured was
necessary, the scale would not have exceeded thirty.

Dyer saw all this plainly enough, but was not able to remedy it.
That was not entirely his fault.  He did not dare give the
delinquents their time, for he would not have known where to fill
their places.  This lay in Radway's experience.  Dyer felt that
responsibilities a little too great had been forced on him, which
was partly true.  In a few days the young man's facile conscience
had covered all his shortcomings with the blanket excuse.  He
conceived that he had a grievance against Radway!



Chapter X


Radway returned to camp by the 6th of January.  He went on snowshoes
over the entire job; and then sat silently in the office smoking
"Peerless" in his battered old pipe.  Dyer watched him amusedly,
secure in his grievance in case blame should be attached to him.
The jobber looked older.  The lines of dry good-humor about his eyes
had subtly changed to an expression of pathetic anxiety.  He attached
no blame to anybody, but rose the next morning at horn-blow, and the
men found they had a new master over them.

And now the struggle with the wilderness came to grapples.  Radway
was as one possessed by a burning fever.  He seemed everywhere at
once, always helping with his own shoulder and arm, hurrying eagerly.
For once luck seemed with him.  The marsh was cut over; the "eighty"
on section eight was skidded without a break.  The weather held cold
and clear.

Now it became necessary to put the roads in shape for hauling.  All
winter the blacksmith, between his tasks of shoeing and mending,
had occupied his time in fitting the iron-work on eight log-sleighs
which the carpenter had hewed from solid sticks of timber.  They were
tremendous affairs, these sleighs, with runners six feet apart, and
bunks nine feet in width for the reception of logs.  The bunks were
so connected by two loosely-coupled rods that, when emptied, they
could be swung parallel with the road, so reducing the width of the
sleigh.  The carpenter had also built two immense tanks on runners,
holding each some seventy barrels of water, and with holes so
arranged in the bottom and rear that on the withdrawal of plugs the
water would flood the entire width of the road.  These sprinklers
were filled by horse power.  A chain, running through blocks attached
to a solid upper framework, like the open belfry of an Italian
monastery, dragged a barrel up a wooden track from the water hole to
the opening in the sprinkler.  When in action this formidable machine
weighed nearly two tons and resembled a moving house.  Other men had
felled two big hemlocks, from which they had hewed beams for a V plow.

The V plow was now put in action.  Six horses drew it down the road,
each pair superintended by a driver.  The machine was weighted down
by a number of logs laid across the arms.  Men guided it by levers,
and by throwing their weight against the fans of the plow.  It was a
gay, animated scene this, full of the spirit of winter--the plodding,
straining horses, the brilliantly dressed, struggling men, the
sullen-yielding snow thrown to either side, the shouts, warnings,
and commands.  To right and left grew white banks of snow.  Behind
stretched a broad white path in which a scant inch hid the bare earth.

For some distance the way led along comparatively high ground.  Then,
skirting the edge of a lake, it plunged into a deep creek bottom
between hills.  Here, earlier in the year, eleven bridges had been
constructed, each a labor of accuracy; and perhaps as many swampy
places had been "corduroyed" by carpeting them with long parallel
poles.  Now the first difficulty began.

Some of the bridges had sunk below the level, and the approaches
had to be corduroyed to a practicable grade.  Others again were
humped up like tom-cats, and had to be pulled apart entirely.  In
spots the "corduroy" had spread, so that the horses thrust their
hoofs far down into leg-breaking holes.  The experienced animals
were never caught, however.  As soon as they felt the ground giving
way beneath one foot, they threw their weight on the other.

Still, that sort of thing was to be expected.  A gang of men who
followed the plow carried axes and cant-hooks for the purpose of
repairing extemporaneously just such defects, which never would
have been discovered otherwise than by the practical experience.
Radway himself accompanied the plow.  Thorpe, who went along as one
of the "road monkeys," saw now why such care had been required of
him in smoothing the way of stubs, knots, and hummocks.

Down the creek an accident occurred on this account.  The plow had
encountered a drift.  Three times the horses had plunged at it, and
three times had been brought to a stand, not so much by the drag of
the V plow as by the wallowing they themselves had to do in the drift.

"No use, break her through, boys," said Radway.  So a dozen men
hurled their bodies through, making an opening for the horses.

"Hi! YUP!" shouted the three teamsters, gathering up their reins.

The horses put their heads down and plunged.  The whole apparatus
moved with a rush, men clinging, animals digging their hoofs in,
snow flying.  Suddenly there came a check, then a CRACK, and then
the plow shot forward so suddenly and easily that the horses all
but fell on their noses.  The flanging arms of the V, forced in a
place too narrow, had caught between heavy stubs.  One of the arms
had broken square off.

There was nothing for it but to fell another hemlock and hew out
another beam, which meant a day lost.  Radway occupied his men with
shovels in clearing the edge of the road, and started one of his
sprinklers over the place already cleared.  Water holes of suitable
size had been blown in the creek bank by dynamite.  There the
machines were filled.  It was a slow process.  Stratton attached
his horse to the chain and drove him back and forth, hauling the
barrel up and down the slideway.  At the bottom it was capsized
and filled by means of a long pole shackled to its bottom and
manipulated by old man Heath.  At the top it turned over by its
own weight.  Thus seventy odd times.

Then Fred Green hitched his team on and the four horses drew the
creaking, cumbrous vehicle spouting down the road.  Water gushed in
fans from the openings on either side and beneath; and in streams
from two holes behind.  Not for an instant as long as the flow
continued dared the teamsters breathe their horses, for a pause
would freeze the runners tight to the ground.  A tongue at either
end obviated the necessity of turning around.

While the other men hewed at the required beam for the broken V
plow, Heath, Stratton, and Green went over the cleared road-length
once.  To do so required three sprinklerfuls.  When the road should
be quite free, and both sprinklers running, they would have to keep
at it until after midnight.

And then silently the wilderness stretched forth her hand and pushed
these struggling atoms back to their place.

That night it turned warmer.  The change was heralded by a shift of
wind.  Then some blue jays appeared from nowhere and began to scream
at their more silent brothers, the whisky jacks.

"She's goin' to rain," said old Jackson.  "The air is kind o' holler."

"Hollow?" said Thorpe, laughing.  "How is that?"

"I don' no," confessed Hines, "but she is.  She jest feels that way."

In the morning the icicles dripped from the roof, and although the
snow did not appreciably melt, it shrank into itself and became
pock-marked on the surface.

Radway was down looking at the road.

"She's holdin' her own," said he, "but there ain't any use putting
more water on her.  She ain't freezing a mite.  We'll plow her out."

So they finished the job, and plowed her out, leaving exposed the
wet, marshy surface of the creek-bottom, on which at night a thin
crust formed.  Across the marsh the old tramped road held up the
horses, and the plow swept clear a little wider swath.

"She'll freeze a little to-night," said Radway hopefully.  "You
sprinkler boys get at her and wet her down."

Until two o'clock in the morning the four teams and the six men
creaked back and forth spilling hardly-gathered water--weird,
unearthly, in the flickering light of their torches.  Then they
crept in and ate sleepily the food that a sleepy cookee set out
for them.

By morning the mere surface of this sprinkled water had frozen, the
remainder beneath had drained away, and so Radway found in his road
considerable patches of shell ice, useless, crumbling.  He looked
in despair at the sky.  Dimly through the gray he caught the tint
of blue.

The sun came out.  Nut-hatches and wood-peckers ran gayly up the
warming trunks of the trees.  Blue jays fluffed and perked and
screamed in the hard-wood tops.  A covey of grouse ventured from the
swamp and strutted vainly, a pause of contemplation between each
step.  Radway, walking out on the tramped road of the marsh, cracked
the artificial skin and thrust his foot through into icy water.
That night the sprinklers stayed in.

The devil seemed in it.  If the thaw would only cease before the ice
bottom so laboriously constructed was destroyed!  Radway vibrated
between the office and the road.  Men were lying idle; teams were
doing the same.  Nothing went on but the days of the year; and four
of them had already ticked off the calendar.  The deep snow of the
unusually cold autumn had now disappeared from the tops of the
stumps.  Down in the swamp the covey of partridges were beginning
to hope that in a few days more they might discover a bare spot in
the burnings.  It even stopped freezing during the night.  At times
Dyer's little thermometer marked as high as forty degrees.

"I often heard this was a sort 'v summer resort," observed Tom
Broadhead, "but danged if I knew it was a summer resort all the
year 'round."

The weather got to be the only topic of conversation.  Each had his
say, his prediction.  It became maddening.  Towards evening the chill
of melting snow would deceive many into the belief that a cold snap
was beginning.

"She'll freeze before morning, sure," was the hopeful comment.

And then in the morning the air would be more balmily insulting
than ever.

"Old man is as blue as a whetstone," commented Jackson Hines, "an'
I don't blame him.  This weather'd make a man mad enough to eat the
devil with his horns left on."

By and by it got to be a case of looking on the bright side of the
affair from pure reaction.

"I don't know," said Radway, "it won't be so bad after all.  A
couple of days of zero weather, with all this water lying around,
would fix things up in pretty good shape.  If she only freezes
tight, we'll have a good solid bottom to build on, and that'll be
quite a good rig out there on the marsh."

The inscrutable goddess of the wilderness smiled, and calmly,
relentlessly, moved her next pawn.

It was all so unutterably simple, and yet so effective.  Something
there was in it of the calm inevitability of fate.  It snowed.

All night and all day the great flakes zig-zagged softly down
through the air.  Radway plowed away two feet of it.  The surface
was promptly covered by a second storm.  Radway doggedly plowed it
out again.

This time the goddess seemed to relent.  The ground froze solid.
The sprinklers became assiduous in their labor.  Two days later the
road was ready for the first sleigh, its surface of thick, glassy
ice, beautiful to behold; the ruts cut deep and true; the grades
sanded, or sprinkled with retarding hay on the descents.  At the
river the banking ground proved solid.  Radway breathed again, then
sighed.  Spring was eight days nearer.  He was eight days more behind.



Chapter XI


As soon as loading began, the cook served breakfast at three
o'clock.  The men worked by the light of torches, which were often
merely catsup jugs with wicking in the necks.  Nothing could be more
picturesque than a teamster conducting one of his great pyramidical
loads over the little inequalities of the road, in the ticklish
places standing atop with the bent knee of the Roman charioteer,
spying and forestalling the chances of the way with a fixed eye and
an intense concentration that relaxed not one inch in the miles of
the haul.  Thorpe had become a full-fledged cant-hook man.

He liked the work.  There is about it a skill that fascinates.  A
man grips suddenly with the hook of his strong instrument, stopping
one end that the other may slide; he thrusts the short, strong stock
between the log and the skid, allowing it to be overrun; he stops
the roll with a sudden sure grasp applied at just the right moment
to be effective.  Sometimes he allows himself to be carried up
bodily, clinging to the cant-hook like an acrobat to a bar, until
the log has rolled once; when, his weapon loosened, he drops
lightly, easily to the ground.  And it is exciting to pile the logs
on the sleigh, first a layer of five, say; then one of six smaller;
of but three; of two; until, at the very apex, the last is dragged
slowly up the skids, poised, and, just as it is about to plunge
down the other side, is gripped and held inexorably by the little
men in blue flannel shirts.

Chains bind the loads.  And if ever, during the loading, or
afterwards when the sleigh is in motion, the weight of the logs
causes the pyramid to break down and squash out;--then woe to the
driver, or whoever happens to be near!  A saw log does not make a
great deal of fuss while falling, but it falls through anything that
happens in its way, and a man who gets mixed up in a load of twenty-
five or thirty of them obeying the laws of gravitation from a height
of some fifteen to twenty feet, can be crushed into strange shapes
and fragments.  For this reason the loaders are picked and careful
men.

At the banking grounds, which lie in and about the bed of the river,
the logs are piled in a gigantic skidway to await the spring freshets,
which will carry them down stream to the "boom."  In that enclosure
they remain until sawed in the mill.

Such is the drama of the saw log, a story of grit, resourcefulness,
adaptability, fortitude and ingenuity hard to match.  Conditions
never repeat themselves in the woods as they do in the factory.  The
wilderness offers ever new complications to solve, difficulties to
overcome.  A man must think of everything, figure on everything,
from the grand sweep of the country at large to the pressure on a
king-bolt.  And where another possesses the boundless resources of
a great city, he has to rely on the material stored in one corner
of a shed.  It is easy to build a palace with men and tools; it is
difficult to build a log cabin with nothing but an ax.  His wits
must help him where his experience fails; and his experience must
push him mechanically along the track of habit when successive
buffetings have beaten his wits out of his head.  In a day he must
construct elaborate engines, roads, and implements which old
civilization considers the works of leisure.  Without a thought
of expense he must abandon as temporary, property which other
industries cry out at being compelled to acquire as permanent.
For this reason he becomes in time different from his fellows.
The wilderness leaves something of her mystery in his eyes, that
mystery of hidden, unknown but guessed, power.  Men look after him
on the street, as they would look after any other pioneer, in vague
admiration of a scope more virile than their own.

Thorpe, in common with the other men, had thought Radway's vacation
at Christmas time a mistake.  He could not but admire the feverish
animation that now characterized the jobber.  Every mischance was as
quickly repaired as aroused expedient could do the work.

The marsh received first attention.  There the restless snow drifted
uneasily before the wind.  Nearly every day the road had to be
plowed, and the sprinklers followed the teams almost constantly.
Often it was bitter cold, but no one dared to suggest to the
determined jobber that it might be better to remain indoors.  The
men knew as well as he that the heavy February snows would block
traffic beyond hope of extrication.

As it was, several times an especially heavy fall clogged the way.
The snow-plow, even with extra teams, could hardly force its path
through.  Men with shovels helped.  Often but a few loads a day, and
they small, could be forced to the banks by the utmost exertions of
the entire crew.  Esprit de corps awoke.  The men sprang to their
tasks with alacrity, gave more than an hour's exertion to each of
the twenty-four, took a pride in repulsing the assaults of the
great enemy, whom they personified under the generic "She."  Mike
McGovern raked up a saint somewhere whom he apostrophized in a
personal and familiar manner.

He hit his head against an overhanging branch.

"You're a nice wan, now ain't ye?" he cried angrily at the
unfortunate guardian of his soul.  "Dom if Oi don't quit ye!
Ye see!"

"Be the gate of Hivin!" he shouted, when he opened the door of
mornings and discovered another six inches of snow, "Ye're a
burrd!  If Oi couldn't make out to be more of a saint than that,
Oi'd quit the biznis!  Move yor pull, an' get us some dacint
weather!  Ye awt t' be road monkeyin' on th' golden streets, thot's
what ye awt to be doin'!"

Jackson Hines was righteously indignant, but with the shrewdness of
the old man, put the blame partly where it belonged.

"I ain't sayin'," he observed judicially, "that this weather ain't
hell.  It's hell and repeat.  But a man sort've got to expec' weather.
He looks for it, and he oughta be ready for it.  The trouble is we
got behind Christmas.  It's that Dyer.  He's about as mean as they
make 'em.  The only reason he didn't die long ago is becuz th'
Devil's thought him too mean to pay any 'tention to.  If ever he
should die an' go to Heaven he'd pry up th' golden streets an' use
the infernal pit for a smelter."

With this magnificent bit of invective, Jackson seized a lantern
and stumped out to see that the teamsters fed their horses properly.

"Didn't know you were a miner, Jackson," called Thorpe, laughing.

"Young feller," replied Jackson at the door, "it's a lot easier
to tell what I AIN'T been."

So floundering, battling, making a little progress every day, the
strife continued.

One morning in February, Thorpe was helping load a big butt log.
He was engaged in "sending up"; that is, he was one of the two
men who stand at either side of the skids to help the ascending log
keep straight and true to its bed on the pile.  His assistant's end
caught on a sliver, ground for a second, and slipped back.  Thus the
log ran slanting across the skids instead of perpendicular to them.
To rectify the fault, Thorpe dug his cant-hook into the timber and
threw his weight on the stock.  He hoped in this manner to check
correspondingly the ascent of his end.  In other words, he took the
place, on his side, of the preventing sliver, so equalizing the
pressure and forcing the timber to its proper position.  Instead of
rolling, the log slid.  The stock of the cant-hook was jerked from
his hands.  He fell back, and the cant-hook, after clinging for a
moment to the rough bark, snapped down and hit him a crushing blow
on the top of the head.

Had a less experienced man than Jim Gladys been stationed at the
other end, Thorpe's life would have ended there.  A shout of
surprise or horror would have stopped the horse pulling on the
decking chain; the heavy stick would have slid back on the
prostrate young man, who would have thereupon been ground to atoms
as he lay.  With the utmost coolness Gladys swarmed the slanting
face of the load; interposed the length of his cant-hook stock
between the log and it; held it exactly long enough to straighten
the timber, but not so long as to crush his own head and arm; and
ducked, just as the great piece of wood rumbled over the end of the
skids and dropped with a thud into the place Norton, the "top" man,
had prepared for it.

It was a fine deed, quickly thought, quickly dared.  No one saw it.
Jim Gladys was a hero, but a hero without an audience.

They took Thorpe up and carried him in, just as they had carried
Hank Paul before.  Men who had not spoken a dozen words to him in
as many days gathered his few belongings and stuffed them awkwardly
into his satchel.  Jackson Hines prepared the bed of straw and warm
blankets in the bottom of the sleigh that was to take him out.

"He would have made a good boss," said the old fellow.  "He's a
hard man to nick."

Thorpe was carried in from the front, and the battle went on
without him.



Chapter XII


Thorpe never knew how carefully he was carried to camp, nor how
tenderly the tote teamster drove his hay-couched burden to Beeson
Lake.  He had no consciousness of the jolting train, in the baggage
car of which Jimmy, the little brakeman, and Bud, and the baggage
man spread blankets, and altogether put themselves to a great deal
of trouble.  When finally he came to himself, he was in a long,
bright, clean room, and the sunset was throwing splashes of light
on the ceiling over his head.

He watched them idly for a time; then turned on his pillow.  At once
he perceived a long, double row of clean white-painted iron beds, on
which lay or sat figures of men.  Other figures, of women, glided
here and there noiselessly.  They wore long, spreading dove-gray
clothes, with a starched white kerchief drawn over the shoulders
and across the breast.  Their heads were quaintly white-garbed in
stiff winglike coifs, fitting close about the oval of the face.
Then Thorpe sighed comfortably, and closed his eyes and blessed the
chance that he had bought a hospital ticket of the agent who had
visited camp the month before.  For these were Sisters, and the
young man lay in the Hospital of St. Mary.

Time was when the lumber-jack who had the misfortune to fall sick
or to meet with an accident was in a sorry plight indeed.  If he
possessed a "stake," he would receive some sort of unskilled
attention in one of the numerous and fearful lumberman's boarding-
houses,--just so long as his money lasted, not one  instant more.
Then he was bundled brutally into the street, no matter what his
condition might be.  Penniless, without friends, sick, he drifted
naturally to the county poorhouse.  There he was patched up quickly
and sent out half-cured.  The authorities were not so much to blame.
With the slender appropriations at their disposal, they found
difficulty in taking care of those who came legitimately under their
jurisdiction.  It was hardly to be expected that they would welcome
with open arms a vast army of crippled and diseased men temporarily
from the woods.  The poor lumber-jack was often left broken in mind
and body from causes which a little intelligent care would have
rendered unimportant.

With the establishment of the first St. Mary's hospital, I think at
Bay City, all this was changed.  Now, in it and a half dozen others
conducted on the same principles, the woodsman receives the best of
medicines, nursing, and medical attendance.  From one of the numerous
agents who periodically visit the camps, he purchases for eight
dollars a ticket which admits him at any time during the year to
the hospital, where he is privileged to remain free of further
charge until convalescent.  So valuable are these institutions, and
so excellently are they maintained by the Sisters, that a hospital
agent is always welcome, even in those camps from which ordinary
peddlers and insurance men are rigidly excluded.  Like a great many
other charities built on a common-sense self-supporting rational
basis, the woods hospitals are under the Roman Catholic Church.

In one of these hospitals Thorpe lay for six weeks suffering from
a severe concussion of the brain.  At the end of the fourth, his
fever had broken, but he was pronounced as yet too weak to be moved.

His nurse was a red-cheeked, blue-eyed, homely little Irish girl,
brimming with motherly good-humor.  When Thorpe found strength to
talk, the two became friends.  Through her influence he was moved
to a bed about ten feet from the window.  Thence his privileges were
three roofs and a glimpse of the distant river.

The roofs were covered with snow.  One day Thorpe saw it sink into
itself and gradually run away.  The tinkle tinkle tank tank of drops
sounded from his own eaves.  Down the far-off river, sluggish reaches
of ice drifted.  Then in a night the blue disappeared from the stream.
It became a menacing gray, and even from his distance Thorpe could
catch the swirl of its rising waters.  A day or two later dark masses
drifted or shot across the field of his vision, and twice he thought
he distinguished men standing upright and bold on single logs as they
rushed down the current.

"What is the date?" he asked of the Sister.

"The eleventh of March."

"Isn't it early for the thaw?"

"Listen to 'im!" exclaimed the Sister delightedly.  "Early is it!
Sure th' freshet co't thim all.  Look, darlint, ye kin see th' drive
from here."

"I see," said Thorpe wearily, "when can I get out?"

"Not for wan week," replied the Sister decidedly.

At the end of the week Thorpe said good-by to his attendant, who
appeared as sorry to see him go as though the same partings did not
come to her a dozen times a year; he took two days of tramping the
little town to regain the use of his legs, and boarded the morning
train for Beeson Lake.  He did not pause in the village, but bent
his steps to the river trail.



Chapter XIII


Thorpe found the woods very different from when he had first
traversed them.  They were full of patches of wet earth and of
sunshine; of dark pine, looking suddenly worn, and of fresh green
shoots of needles, looking deliciously springlike.  This was the
contrast everywhere--stern, earnest, purposeful winter, and gay,
laughing, careless spring.  It was impossible not to draw in fresh
spirits with every step.

He followed the trail by the river.  Butterballs and scoters paddled
up at his approach.  Bits of rotten ice occasionally swirled down the
diminishing stream.  The sunshine was clear and bright, but silvery
rather than golden, as though a little of the winter's snow,--a
last ethereal incarnation,--had lingered in its substance.  Around
every bend Thorpe looked for some of Radway's crew "driving" the
logs down the current.  He knew from chance encounters with several
of the men in Bay City that Radway was still in camp; which meant,
of course, that the last of the season's operations were not yet
finished.  Five miles further Thorpe began to wonder whether this
last conclusion might not be erroneous.  The Cass Branch had
shrunken almost to its original limits.  Only here and there a
little bayou or marsh attested recent freshets.  The drive must
have been finished, even this early, for the stream in its present
condition would hardly float saw logs, certainly not in quantity.

Thorpe, puzzled, walked on.  At the banking ground he found empty
skids.  Evidently the drive was over.  And yet even to Thorpe's
ignorance, it seemed  incredible that the remaining million and a
half of logs had been hauled, banked and driven during the short
time he had lain in the Bay City hospital.  More to solve the
problem than in any hope of work, he set out up the logging road.

Another three miles brought him to camp.  It looked strangely wet
and sodden and deserted.  In fact, Thorpe found a bare half dozen
people in it,--Radway, the cook, and four men who were helping to
pack up the movables, and who later would drive out the wagons
containing them.  The jobber showed strong traces of the strain he
had undergone, but greeted Thorpe almost jovially.  He seemed able
to show more of his real nature now that the necessity of authority
had been definitely removed.

"Hullo, young man," he shouted at Thorpe's mud-splashed figure,
"come back to view, the remains?  All well again, heigh?  That's
good!"

He strode down to grip the young fellow heartily by the hand.  It
was impossible not to be charmed by the sincere cordiality of his
manner.

"I didn't know you were through," explained Thorpe, "I came to see
if I could get a job."

"Well now I AM sorry!" cried Radway, "you can turn in and help
though, if you want to."

Thorpe greeted the cook and old Jackson Hines, the only two whom he
knew, and set to work to tie up bundles of blankets, and to collect
axes, peavies, and tools of all descriptions.  This was evidently the
last wagon-trip, for little remained to be done.

"I ought by rights to take the lumber of the roofs and floors,"
observed Radway thoughtfully, "but I guess she don't matter."

Thorpe had never seen him in better spirits.  He ascribed the older
man's hilarity to relief over the completion of a difficult task.
That evening the seven dined together at one end of the long table.
The big room exhaled already the atmosphere of desertion.

"Not much like old times, is she?" laughed Radway.  "Can't you just
shut your eyes and hear Baptiste say, 'Mak' heem de soup one tam
more for me'? She's pretty empty now."

Jackson Hines looked whimsically down the bare board.  "More room
than God made for geese in Ireland," was his comment.

After supper they even sat outside for a little time to smoke their
pipes, chair-tilted against the logs of the cabins, but soon the
chill of melting snow drove them indoors.  The four teamsters played
seven-up in the cook camp by the light of a barn lantern, while
Thorpe and the cook wrote letters.  Thorpe's was to his sister.

"I have been in the hospital for about a month," he wrote.  "Nothing
serious--a crack on the head, which is all right now.  But I cannot
get home this summer, nor, I am afraid, can we arrange about the
school this year.  I am about seventy dollars ahead of where I was
last fall, so you see it is slow business.  This summer I am going
into a mill, but the wages for green labor are not very high there
either," and so on.

When Miss Helen Thorpe, aged seventeen, received this document she
stamped her foot almost angrily.  "You'd think he was a day-laborer!"
she cried.  "Why doesn't he try for a clerkship or something in the
city where he'd have a chance to use his brains!"

The thought of her big, strong, tanned brother chained to a desk
rose to her, and she smiled a little sadly.

"I know," she went on to herself, "he'd rather be a common laborer
in the woods than railroad manager in the office.  He loves his out-
of-doors."

"Helen!" called a voice from below, "if you're through up there, I
wish you'd come down and help me carry this rug out."

The girl's eyes cleared with a snap.

"So do I!" she cried defiantly, "so do I love out-of-doors!  I like
the woods and the fields and the trees just as much as he does, only
differently; but I don't get out!"

And thus she came to feeling rebelliously that her brother had been
a little selfish in his choice of an occupation, that he sacrificed
her inclinations to his own.  She did not guess,--how could she?--
his dreams for her.  She did not see the future through his thoughts,
but through his words.  A negative hopelessness settled down on her,
which soon her strong spirit, worthy counterpart of her brother's,
changed to more positive rebellion.  Thorpe had aroused antagonism
where he craved only love.  The knowledge of that fact would have
surprised and hurt him, for he was entirely without suspicion of
it.  He lived subjectively to so great a degree that his thoughts
and aims took on a certain tangible objectivity,--they became so
real to him that he quite overlooked the necessity of communication
to make them as real to others.  He assumed unquestioningly that
the other must know.  So entirely had he thrown himself into his
ambition of making a suitable position for Helen, so continually
had he dwelt on it in his thoughts, so earnestly had he striven for
it in every step of the great game he was beginning to play, that
it never occurred to him he should also concede a definite outward
manifestation of his feeling in order to assure its acceptance.
Thorpe believed that he had sacrificed every thought and effort to
his sister.  Helen was becoming convinced that he had considered
only himself.

After finishing the letter which gave occasion to this train of
thought, Thorpe lit his pipe and strolled out into the darkness.
Opposite the little office he stopped amazed.

Through the narrow window he could see Radway seated in front of
the stove.  Every attitude of the man denoted the most profound
dejection.  He had sunk down into his chair until he rested on
almost the small of his back, his legs were struck straight out in
front of him, his chin rested on his breast, and his two arms hung
listless at his side, a pipe half falling from the fingers of one
hand.  All the facetious lines had turned to pathos.  In his face
sorrowed the anxious, questing, wistful look of the St. Bernard
that does not understand.

"What's the matter with the boss, anyway?" asked Thorpe in a low
voice of Jackson Hines, when the seven-up game was finished.

"H'aint ye heard?" inquired the old man in surprise.

"Why, no.  What?"

"Busted," said the old man sententiously.

"How?  What do you mean?"

"What I say.  He's busted.  That freshet caught him too quick.  They's
more'n a million and a half logs left in the woods that can't be got
out this year, and as his contract calls for a finished job, he don't
get nothin' for what he's done."

"That's a queer rig," commented Thorpe.  "He's done a lot of valuable
work here,--the timber's cut and skidded, anyway; and he's delivered
a good deal of it to the main drive.  The M. & D. outfit get all the
advantage of that."

"They do, my son.  When old Daly's hand gets near anything, it
cramps.  I don't know how the old man come to make such a contrac',
but he did.  Result is, he's out his expenses and time."

To understand exactly the catastrophe that had occurred, it is
necessary to follow briefly an outline of the process after the
logs have been piled on the banks.  There they remain until the
break-up attendant on spring shall flood the stream to a freshet.
The rollways are then broken, and the saw logs floated down the
river to the mill where they are to be cut into lumber.

If for any reason this transportation by water is delayed until
the flood goes down, the logs are stranded or left in pools.
Consequently every logger puts into the two or three weeks of
freshet water a feverish activity which shall carry his product
through before the ebb.

The exceptionally early break-up of this spring, combined with the
fact that, owing to the series of incidents and accidents already
sketched, the actual cutting and skidding had fallen so far behind,
caught Radway unawares.  He saw his rollways breaking out while his
teams were still hauling in the woods.  In order to deliver to the
mouth of the Cass Branch the three million already banked, he was
forced to drop everything else and attend strictly to the drive.
This left still, as has been stated, a million and a half on
skidways, which Radway knew he would be unable to get out that year.

In spite of the jobber's certainty that his claim was thus annulled,
and that he might as well abandon the enterprise entirely for all he
would ever get out of it, he finished the "drive" conscientiously
and saved to the Company the logs already banked.  Then he had
interviewed Daly.  The latter refused to pay him one cent.  Nothing
remained but to break camp and grin as best he might over the loss
of his winter's work and expenses.

The next day Radway and Thorpe walked the ten miles of the river
trail together, while the teamsters and the cook drove down the
five teams.  Under the influence of the solitude and a certain
sympathy which Thorpe manifested, Radway talked--a very little.

"I got behind; that's all there is to it," he said.  "I s'pose I
ought to have driven the men a little; but still, I don't know.  It
gets pretty cold on the plains.  I guess I bit off more than I could
chew."

His eye followed listlessly a frenzied squirrel swinging from the
tops of poplars.

"I wouldn't 'a done it for myself," he went on.  "I don't like the
confounded responsibility.  They's too much worry connected with it
all.  I had a good snug little stake--mighty nigh six thousand.
She's all gone now.  That'd have been enough for me--I ain't a
drinkin' man.  But then there was the woman and the kid.  This ain't
no country for woman-folks, and I wanted t' take little Lida out o'
here.  I had lots of experience in the woods, and I've seen men make
big money time and again, who didn't know as much about it as I do.
But they got there, somehow.  Says I, I'll make a stake this year--
I'd a had twelve thousand in th' bank, if things'd have gone right--
and then we'll jest move down around Detroit an' I'll put Lida in
school."

Thorpe noticed a break in the man's voice, and glancing suddenly
toward him was astounded to catch his eyes brimming with tears.
Radway perceived the surprise.

"You know when I left Christmas?" he asked.

"Yes."

"I was gone two weeks, and them two weeks done me.  We was going
slow enough before, God knows, but even with the rank weather and
all, I think we'd have won out, if we could have held the same gait."

Radway paused.  Thorpe was silent.

"The boys thought it was a mighty poor rig, my leaving that way."

He paused again in evident expectation of a reply.  Again Thorpe was
silent.

"Didn't they?" Radway insisted.

"Yes, they did," answered Thorpe.

The older man sighed.  "I thought so," he went on.  "Well, I didn't
go to spend Christmas.  I went because Jimmy brought me a telegram
that Lida was sick with diphtheria.  I sat up nights with her for
'leven days."

"No bad after-effects, I hope?" inquired Thorpe.

"She died," said Radway simply.

The two men tramped stolidly on.  This was too great an affair for
Thorpe to approach except on the knees of his spirit.  After a long
interval, during which the waters had time to still, the young man
changed the subject.

"Aren't you going to get anything out of M. & D.?" he asked.

"No.  Didn't earn nothing.  I left a lot of their saw logs hung up
in the woods, where they'll deteriorate from rot and worms.  This is
their last season in this district."

"Got anything left?"

"Not a cent."

"What are you going to do?"

"Do!" cried the old woodsman, the fire springing to his eye.  "Do!
I'm going into the woods, by God!  I'm going to work with my hands,
and be happy!  I'm going to do other men's work for them and take
other men's pay.  Let them do the figuring and worrying.  I'll boss
their gangs and make their roads and see to their logging for 'em,
but it's got to be THEIRS.  No! I'm going to be a free man by the G.
jumping Moses!"



Chapter XIV


Thorpe dedicated a musing instant to the incongruity of rejoicing
over a freedom gained by ceasing to be master and becoming servant.

"Radway," said he suddenly, "I need money and I need it bad.  I
think you ought to get something out of this job of the M. & D.--not
much, but something.  Will you give me a share of what I can collect
from them?"

"Sure!" agreed the jobber readily, with a laugh.  "Sure! But you won't
get anything.  I'll give you ten per cent quick."

"Good enough!" cried Thorpe.

"But don't be too sure you'll earn day wages doing it," warned the
other.  "I saw Daly when I was down here last week."

"My time's not valuable," replied Thorpe.  "Now when we get to town
I want your power of attorney and a few figures, after which I will
not bother you again."

The next day the young man called for the second time at the little
red-painted office under the shadow of the mill, and for the second
time stood before the bulky power of the junior member of the firm.

"Well, young man, what can I do for you?" asked the latter.

"I have been informed," said Thorpe without preliminary, "that
you intend to pay John Radway nothing for the work done on the
Cass Branch this winter.  Is that true?"

Daly studied his antagonist meditatively.  "If it is true, what is
it to you?" he asked at length.

"I am acting in Mr. Radway's interest."

"You are one of Radway's men?"

"Yes."

"In what capacity have you been working for him?"

"Cant-hook man," replied Thorpe briefly.

"I see," said Daly slowly.  Then suddenly, with an intensity of
energy that startled Thorpe, he cried: "Now you get out of here!
Right off!  Quick!"

The younger man recognized the compelling and autocratic boss
addressing a member of the crew.

"I shall do nothing of the kind!" he replied with a flash of fire.

The mill-owner leaped to his feet every inch a leader of men.  Thorpe
did not wish to bring about an actual scene of violence.  He had
attained his object, which was to fluster the other out of his
judicial calm.

"I have Radway's power of attorney," he added.

Daly sat down, controlled himself with an effort, and growled out,
"Why didn't you say so?"

"Now I would like to know your position," went on Thorpe.  "I am
not here to make trouble, but as an associate of Mr. Radway, I have
a right to understand the case.  Of course I have his side of the
story," he suggested, as though convinced that a detailing of the
other side might change his views.

Daly considered carefully, fixing his flint-blue eyes unswervingly
on Thorpe's face.  Evidently his scrutiny advised him that the young
man was a force to be reckoned with.

"It's like this," said he abruptly, "we contracted last fall with
this man Radway to put in five million feet of our timber, delivered
to the main drive at the mouth of the Cass Branch.  In this he was
to act independently except as to the matter of provisions.  Those
he drew from our van, and was debited with the amount of the same.
Is that clear?"

"Perfectly," replied Thorpe.

"In return we were to pay him, merchantable scale, four dollars a
thousand.  If, however, he failed to put in the whole job, the
contract was void."

"That's how I understand it," commented Thorpe.  "Well?"

"Well, he didn't get in the five million.  There's a million and a
half hung up in the woods."

"But you have in your hands three million and a half, which under
the present arrangement you get free of any charge whatever."

"And we ought to get it," cried Daly.  "Great guns!  Here we intend
to saw this summer and quit.  We want to get in every stick of
timber we own so as to be able to clear out of here for good and
all at the close of the season; and now this condigned jobber ties
us up for a million and a half."

"It is exceedingly annoying," conceded Thorpe, "and it is a good
deal of Radway's fault, I am willing to admit, but it's your fault
too."

"To be sure," replied Daly with the accent of sarcasm.

"You had no business entering into any such contract.  It gave him
no show."

"I suppose that was mainly his lookout, wasn't it?  And as I already
told you, we had to protect ourselves."

"You should have demanded security for the completion of the work.
Under your present agreement, if Radway got in the timber, you were
to pay him a fair price.  If he didn't, you appropriated everything
he had already done.  In other words, you made him a bet."

"I don't care what you call it," answered Daly, who had recovered
his good-humor in contemplation of the security of his position.
"The fact stands all right."

"It does," replied Thorpe unexpectedly, "and I'm glad of it.  Now
let's examine a few figures.  You owned five million feet of timber,
which at the price of stumpage" (standing trees) "was worth ten
thousand dollars."

"Well."

"You come out at the end of the season with three million and a
half of saw logs, which with the four dollars' worth of logging
added, are worth twenty-one thousand dollars."

"Hold on!" cried Daly, "we paid Radway four dollars; we could have
done it ourselves for less."

"You could not have done it for one cent less than four-twenty in
that country," replied Thorpe, "as any expert will testify."

"Why did we give it to Radway at four, then?"

"You saved the expense of a salaried overseer, and yourselves some
bother," replied Thorpe.  "Radway could do it for less, because, for
some strange reason which you yourself do not understand, a jobber
can always log for less than a company."

"We could have done it for four," insisted Daly stubbornly, "but
get on.  What are you driving at?  My time's valuable."

"Well, put her at four, then," agreed Thorpe.  "That makes your
saw logs worth over twenty thousand dollars.  Of this value Radway
added thirteen thousand.  You have appropriated that much of his
without paying him one cent."

Daly seemed amused.  "How about the million and a half feet of ours
HE appropriated?" he asked quietly.

"I'm coming to that.  Now for your losses.  At the stumpage rate
your million and a half which Radway 'appropriated' would be only
three thousand.  But for the sake of argument, we'll take the actual
sum you'd have received for saw logs.  Even then the million and a
half would only have been worth between eight and nine thousand.
Deducting this purely theoretical loss Radway has occasioned you,
from the amount he has gained for you, you are still some four or
five thousand ahead of the game.  For that you paid him nothing."

"That's Radway's lookout."

"In justice you should pay him that amount.  He is a poor man.  He
has sunk all he owned in this venture, some twelve thousand dollars,
and he has nothing to live on.  Even if you pay him five thousand,
he has lost considerable, while you have gained."

"How have we gained by this bit of philanthropy?"

"Because you originally paid in cash for all that timber on the
stump just ten thousand dollars and you get from Radway saw logs to
the value of twenty," replied Thorpe sharply.  "Besides you still
own the million and a half which, if you do not care to put them in
yourself, you can sell for something on the skids."

"Don't you know, young man, that white pine logs on skids will spoil
utterly in a summer?  Worms get into em."

"I do," replied Thorpe, "unless you bark them; which process will
cost you about one dollar a thousand.  You can find any amount of
small purchasers at reduced price.  You can sell them easily at
three dollars.  That nets you for your million and a half a little
over four thousand dollars more.  Under the circumstances, I do not
think that my request for five thousand is at all exorbitant."

Daly laughed.  "You are a shrewd figurer, and your remarks are
interesting," said he.

"Will you give five thousand dollars?" asked Thorpe.

"I will not," replied Daly, then with a sudden change of humor, "and
now I'll do a little talking.  I've listened to you just as long as
I'm going to.  I have Radway's contract in that safe and I live up
to it.  I'll thank you to go plumb to hell!"

"That's your last word, is it?" asked Thorpe, rising.

"It is."

"Then," said he slowly and distinctly, "I'll tell you what I'll
do.  I intend to collect in full the four dollars a thousand for the
three million and a half Mr. Radway has delivered to you.  In return
Mr. Radway will purchase of you at the stumpage rates of two dollars
a thousand the million and a half he failed to put in.  That makes
a bill against you, if my figuring is correct, of just eleven thousand
dollars.  You will pay that bill, and I will tell you why: your
contract will be classed in any court as a gambling contract for lack
of consideration.  You have no legal standing in the world.  I call
your bluff, Mr. Daly, and I'll fight you from the drop of the hat
through every court in Christendom."

"Fight ahead," advised Daly sweetly, who knew perfectly well that
Thorpe's law was faulty.  As a matter of fact the young man could
have collected on other grounds, but neither was aware of that.

"Furthermore," pursued Thorpe in addition, "I'll repeat my offer
before witnesses; and if I win the first suit, I'll sue you for the
money we could have made by purchasing the extra million and a half
before it had a chance to spoil."

This statement had its effect, for it forced an immediate settlement
before the pine on the skids should deteriorate.  Daly lounged back
with a little more deadly carelessness.

"And, lastly," concluded Thorpe, playing his trump card, "the suit
from start to finish will be published in every important paper in
this country.  If you do not believe I have the influence to do this,
you are at liberty to doubt the fact."

Daly was cogitating many things.  He knew that publicity was the
last thing to be desired.  Thorpe's statement had been made in
view of the fact that much of the business of a lumber firm is done
on credit.  He thought that perhaps a rumor of a big suit going
against the firm might weaken confidence.  As a matter of fact,
this consideration had no weight whatever with the older man,
although the threat of publicity actually gained for Thorpe what he
demanded.  The lumberman feared the noise of an investigation solely
and simply because his firm, like so many others, was engaged at the
time in stealing government timber in the upper peninsula.  He did
not call it stealing; but that was what it amounted to.  Thorpe's
shot in the air hit full.

"I think we can arrange a basis of settlement," he said finally.
"Be here to-morrow morning at ten with Radway."

"Very well," said Thorpe.

"By the way," remarked Daly, "I don't believe I know your name?"

"Thorpe," was the reply.

"Well, Mr. Thorpe," said the lumberman with cold anger, "if at
any time there is anything within my power or influence that you
want--I'll see that you don't get it."



Chapter XV


The whole affair was finally compromised for nine thousand dollars.
Radway, grateful beyond expression, insisted on Thorpe's acceptance
of an even thousand of it.  With this money in hand, the latter felt
justified in taking a vacation for the purpose of visiting his
sister, so in two days after the signing of the check he walked
up the straight garden path that led to Renwick's home.

It was a little painted frame house, back from the street, fronted
by a precise bit of lawn, with a willow bush at one corner.  A white
picket fence effectually separated it from a broad, shaded, not
unpleasing street.  An osage hedge and a board fence respectively
bounded the side and back.

Under the low porch Thorpe rang the bell at a door flanked by two
long, narrow strips of imitation stained glass.  He entered then a
little dark hall from which the stairs rose almost directly at the
door, containing with difficulty a hat-rack and a table on which
rested a card tray with cards.  In the course of greeting an elderly
woman, he stepped into the parlor.  This was a small square apartment
carpeted in dark Brussels, and stuffily glorified in the bourgeois
manner by a white marble mantel-piece, several pieces of mahogany
furniture upholstered in haircloth, a table on which reposed a
number of gift books in celluloid and other fancy bindings, an
old-fashioned piano with a doily and a bit of china statuary, a
cabinet or so containing such things as ore specimens, dried
seaweed and coins, and a spindle-legged table or two upholding
glass cases garnished with stuffed birds and wax flowers.  The
ceiling was so low that the heavy window hangings depended almost
from the angle of it and the walls.

Thorpe, by some strange freak of psychology, suddenly recalled a
wild, windy day in the forest.  He had stood on the top of a height.
He saw again the sharp puffs of snow, exactly like the smoke from
bursting shells, where a fierce swoop of the storm struck the laden
tops of pines; the dense swirl, again exactly like smoke but now of
a great fire, that marked the lakes.  The picture super-imposed
itself silently over this stuffy bourgeois respectability, like the
shadow of a dream.  He heard plainly enough the commonplace drawl
of the woman before him offering him the platitudes of her kind.

"You are lookin' real well, Mr. Thorpe," she was saying, "an' I
just know Helen will be glad to see you.  She had a hull afternoon
out to-day and won't be back to tea.  Dew set and tell me about what
you've been a-doin' and how you're a-gettin' along."

"No, thank you, Mrs. Renwick," he replied, "I'll come back later.
How is Helen?"

"She's purty well; and sech a nice girL I think she's getting right
handsome."

"Can you tell me where she went?"

But Mrs. Renwick did not know.  So Thorpe wandered about the maple-
shaded streets of the little town.

For the purposes he had in view five hundred dollars would be none
too much.  The remaining five hundred he had resolved to invest in
his sister's comfort and happiness.  He had thought the matter over
and come to his decision in that secretive, careful fashion so
typical of him, working over every logical step of his induction so
thoroughly that it ended by becoming part of his mental fiber.  So
when he reached the conclusion it had already become to him an axiom.
In presenting it as such to his sister, he never realized that she
had not followed with him the logical steps, and so could hardly be
expected to accept the conclusion out-of-hand.

Thorpe wished to give his sister the best education possible in
the circumstances.  She was now nearly eighteen years old.  He
knew likewise that he would probably experience a great deal of
difficulty in finding another family which would afford the young
girl quite the same equality coupled with so few disadvantages.
Admitted that its level of intellect and taste was not high, Mrs.
Renwick was on the whole a good influence.  Helen had not in the
least the position of servant, but of a daughter.  She helped around
the house; and in return she was fed, lodged and clothed for nothing.

So though the money might have enabled Helen to live independently
in a modest way for a year or so, Thorpe preferred that she remain
where she was.  His game was too much a game of chance.  He might
find himself at the end of the year without further means.  Above all
things he wished to assure Helen's material safety until such time
as he should be quite certain of himself.

In pursuance of this idea he had gradually evolved what seemed to him
an excellent plan.  He had already perfected it by correspondence
with Mrs. Renwick.  It was, briefly, this: he, Thorpe, would at
once hire a servant girl, who would make anything but supervision
unnecessary in so small a household.  The remainder of the money he
had already paid for a year's tuition in the Seminary of the town.
Thus Helen gained her leisure and an opportunity for study; and
still retained her home in case of reverse.

Thorpe found his sister already a young lady.  After the first
delight of meeting had passed, they sat side by side on the
haircloth sofa and took stock of each other.

Helen had developed from the school child to the woman.  She was
a handsome girl, possessed of a slender, well-rounded form, deep
hazel eyes with the level gaze of her brother, a clean-cut patrician
face, and a thorough-bred neatness of carriage that advertised her
good blood.  Altogether a figure rather aloof, a face rather
impassive; but with the possibility of passion and emotion, and
a will to back them.

"Oh, but you're tanned and--and BIG!" she cried, kissing her brother.
"You've had such a strange winter, haven't you?"

"Yes," he replied absently.

Another man would have struck her young imagination with the wild,
free thrill of the wilderness.  Thus he would have gained her
sympathy and understanding.  Thorpe was too much in earnest.

"Things came a little better than I thought they were going to,
toward the last," said he, "and I made a little money."

"Oh, I'm so glad!" she cried.  "Was it much?"

"No, not much," he answered.  The actual figures would have been so
much better!  "I've made arrangements with Mrs. Renwick to hire a
servant girl, so you will have all your time free; and I have paid
a year's tuition for you in the Seminary."

"Oh!" said the girl, and fell silent.

After a time, "Thank you very much, Harry dear."  Then after another
interval, "I think I'll go get ready for supper."

Instead of getting ready for supper, she paced excitedly up and down
her room.

"Oh, why DIDN'T he say what he was about?" she cried to herself.
"Why didn't he!  Why didn't he!"


Next morning she opened the subject again.

"Harry, dear," said she, "I have a little scheme, and I want to see
if it is not feasible.  How much will the girl and the Seminary cost?"

"About four hundred dollars."

"Well now, see, dear.  With four hundred dollars I can live for a
year very nicely by boarding with some girls I know who live in a
sort of a club; and I could learn much more by going to the High
School and continuing with some other classes I am interested in
now.  Why see, Harry!" she cried, all interest.  "We have Professor
Carghill come twice a week to teach us English, and Professor
Johns, who teaches us history, and we hope to get one or two more
this winter.  If I go to the Seminary, I'll have to miss all that.
And Harry, really I don't want to go to the Seminary.  I don't think
I should like it.  I KNOW I shouldn't."

"But why not live here, Helen?" he asked.

"Because I'm TIRED of it!" she cried; "sick to the soul of the
stuffiness, and the glass cases, and the--the GOODNESS of it!"

Thorpe remembered his vision of the wild, wind-tossed pines, and
sighed.  He wanted very, very much to act in accordance with his
sister's desires, although he winced under the sharp hurt pang of
the sensitive man whose intended kindness is not appreciated.  The
impossibility of complying, however, reacted to shut his real ideas
and emotions the more inscrutably within him.

"I'm afraid you would not find the girls' boarding-club scheme a
good one, Helen," said he.  "You'd find it would work better in
theory than in practice."

"But it has worked with the other girls!" she cried.

"I think you would be better off here."

Helen bravely choked back her disappointment.

"I might live here, but let the Seminary drop, anyway.  That would
save a good deal," she begged.  "I'd get quite as much good out of
my work outside, and then we'd have all that money besides."

"I don't know; I'll see," replied Thorpe.  "The mental discipline
of class-room work might be a good thing."

He had already thought of this modification himself, but with his
characteristic caution, threw cold water on the scheme until he
could ascertain definitely whether or not it was practicable.  He
had already paid the tuition for the year, and was in doubt as to
its repayment.  As a matter of fact, the negotiation took about two
weeks.

During that time Helen Thorpe went through her disappointment and
emerged on the other side.  Her nature was at once strong and
adaptable.  One by one she grappled with the different aspects of
the case, and turned them the other way.  By a tour de force she
actually persuaded herself that her own plan was not really
attractive to her.  But what heart-breaks and tears this cost her,
only those who in their youth have encountered such absolute
negations of cherished ideas can guess.

Then Thorpe told her.

"I've fixed it, Helen," said he.  "You can attend the High School
and the classes, if you please.  I have put the two hundred and
fifty dollars out at interest for you."

"Oh, Harry!" she cried reproachfully.  "Why didn't you tell me
before!"

He did not understand; but the pleasure of it had all faded.  She no
longer felt enthusiasm, nor gratitude, nor anything except a dull
feeling that she had been unnecessarily discouraged.  And on his
side, Thorpe was vaguely wounded.

The days, however, passed in the main pleasurably for them both.
They were fond of one another.  The barrier slowly rising between
them was not yet cemented by lack of affection on either side, but
rather by lack of belief in the other's affection.  Helen imagined
Thorpe's interest in her becoming daily more perfunctory.  Thorpe
fancied his sister cold, unreasoning, and ungrateful.  As yet this
was but the vague dust of a cloud.  They could not forget that, but
for each other, they were alone in the world.  Thorpe delayed his
departure from day to day, making all the preparations he possibly
could at home.

Finally Helen came on him busily unpacking a box which a dray had
left at the door.  He unwound and laid one side a Winchester rifle,
a variety of fishing tackle, and some other miscellanies of the
woodsman.  Helen was struck by the beauty of the sporting implements.

"Oh, Harry!" she cried, "aren't they fine!  What are you going to
do with them?"

"Going camping," replied Thorpe, his head in the excelsior.

"When?"

"This summer."

Helen's eyes lit up with a fire of delight.  "How nice!  May I go
with you?" she cried.

Thorpe shook his head.

"I'm afraid not, little girl.  It's going to be a hard trip a long
ways from anywhere.  You couldn't stand it."

"I'm sure I could.  Try me."

"No," replied Thorpe.  "I know you couldn't.  We'll be sleeping
on the ground and going on foot through much extremely difficult
country."

"I wish you'd take me somewhere," pursued Helen.  "I can't get
away this summer unless you do.  Why don't you camp somewhere nearer
home, so I can go?"

Thorpe arose and kissed her tenderly.  He was extremely sorry that
he could not spend the summer with his sister, but he believed
likewise that their future depended to a great extent on this very
trip.  But he did not say so.

"I can't, little girl; that's all.  We've got our way to make."

She understood that he considered the trip too expensive for them
both.  At this moment a paper fluttered from the excelsior.  She
picked it up.  A glance showed her a total of figures that made her
gasp.

"Here is your bill," she said with a strange choke in her voice,
and left the room.

"He can spend sixty dollars on his old guns; but he can't afford
to let me leave this hateful house," she complained to the apple
tree.  "He can go 'way off camping somewhere to have a good time,
but he leaves me sweltering in this miserable little town all
summer.  I don't care if he IS supporting me.  He ought to.  He's
my brother.  Oh, I wish I were a man; I wish I were dead!"

Three days later Thorpe left for the north.  He was reluctant to go.
When the time came, he attempted to kiss Helen good-by.  She caught
sight of the rifle in its new leather and canvas case, and on a
sudden impulse which she could not explain to herself, she turned
away her face and ran into the house.  Thorpe, vaguely hurt, a
little resentful, as the genuinely misunderstood are apt to be,
hesitated a moment, then trudged down the street.  Helen too paused
at the door, choking back her grief.

"Harry! Harry!" she cried wildly; but it was too late.

Both felt themselves to be in the right.  Each realized this fact
in the other.  Each recognized the impossibility of imposing his
own point of view over the other's.






PART II


THE LANDLOOKER



Chapter XVI


In every direction the woods.  Not an opening of any kind offered
the mind a breathing place under the free sky.  Sometimes the pine
groves,--vast, solemn, grand, with the patrician aloofness of the
truly great; sometimes the hardwood,--bright, mysterious, full of
life; sometimes the swamps,--dark, dank, speaking with the voices
of the shyer creatures; sometimes the spruce and balsam thickets,--
aromatic, enticing.  But never the clear, open sky.

And always the woods creatures, in startling abundance and tameness.
The solitary man with the packstraps across his forehead and
shoulders had never seen so many of them.  They withdrew silently
before him as he advanced.  They accompanied him on either side,
watching him with intelligent, bright eyes.  They followed him
stealthily for a little distance, as though escorting him out of
their own particular territory.  Dozens of times a day the traveller
glimpsed the flaunting white flags of deer.  Often the creatures
would take but a few hasty jumps, and then would wheel, the
beautiful embodiments of the picture deer, to snort and paw the
leaves.  Hundreds of birds, of which he did not know the name,
stooped to his inspection, whirred away at his approach, or went
about their business with hardy indifference under his very eyes.
Blase porcupines trundled superbly from his path.  Once a mother-
partridge simulated a broken wing, fluttering painfully.  Early one
morning the traveller ran plump on a fat lolling bear, taking his
ease from the new sun, and his meal from a panic stricken army of
ants.  As beseemed two innocent wayfarers they honored each other
with a salute of surprise, and went their way.  And all about and
through, weaving, watching, moving like spirits, were the forest
multitudes which the young man never saw, but which he divined, and
of whose movements he sometimes caught for a single instant the
faintest patter or rustle.  It constituted the mystery of the forest,
that great fascinating, lovable mystery which, once it steals into
the heart of a man, has always a hearing and a longing when it makes
its voice heard.

The young man's equipment was simple in the extreme.  Attached to a
heavy leather belt of cartridges hung a two-pound ax and a sheath
knife.  In his pocket reposed a compass, an air-tight tin of
matches, and a map drawn on oiled paper of a district divided into
sections.  Some few of the sections were colored, which indicated
that they belonged to private parties.  All the rest was State or
Government land.  He carried in his hand a repeating rifle.  The
pack, if opened, would have been found to contain a woolen and a
rubber blanket, fishing tackle, twenty pounds or so of flour, a
package of tea, sugar, a slab of bacon carefully wrapped in oiled
cloth, salt, a suit of underwear, and several extra pairs of thick
stockings.  To the outside of the pack had been strapped a frying
pan, a tin pail, and a cup.

For more than a week Thorpe had journeyed through the forest without
meeting a human being, or seeing any indications of man, excepting
always the old blaze of the government survey.  Many years before,
officials had run careless lines through the country along the
section-boundaries.  At this time the blazes were so weather-beaten
that Thorpe often found difficulty in deciphering the indications
marked on them.  These latter stated always the section, the township,
and the range east or west by number.  All Thorpe had to do was to
find the same figures on his map.  He knew just where he was.  By
means of his compass he could lay his course to any point that suited
his convenience.

The map he had procured at the United States Land Office in Detroit.
He had set out with the scanty equipment just described for the
purpose of "looking" a suitable bunch of pine in the northern
peninsula, which, at that time, was practically untouched.  Access
to its interior could be obtained only on foot or by river.  The
South Shore Railroad was already engaged in pushing a way through
the virgin forest, but it had as yet penetrated only as far as Seney;
and after all, had been projected more with the idea of establishing
a direct route to Duluth and the copper districts than to aid the
lumber industry.  Marquette, Menominee, and a few smaller places
along the coast were lumbering near at home; but they shipped entirely
by water.  Although the rest of the peninsula also was finely wooded,
a general impression obtained among the craft that it would prove
too inaccessible for successful operation.

Furthermore, at that period, a great deal of talk was believed as
to the inexhaustibility of Michigan pine.  Men in a position to know
what they were talking about stated dogmatically that the forests of
the southern peninsula would be adequate for a great many years to
come.  Furthermore, the magnificent timber of the Saginaw, Muskegon,
and Grand River valleys in the southern peninsula occupied entire
attention.  No one cared to bother about property at so great a
distance from home.  As a consequence, few as yet knew even the
extent of the resources so far north.

Thorpe, however, with the far-sightedness of the born pioneer, had
perceived that the exploitation of the upper country was an affair
of a few years only.

The forests of southern Michigan were vast, but not limitless, and
they had all passed into private ownership.  The north, on the other
hand, would not prove as inaccessible as it now seemed, for the
carrying trade would some day realize that the entire waterway of
the Great Lakes offered an unrivalled outlet.  With that elementary
discovery would begin a rush to the new country.  Tiring of a
profitless employment further south he resolved to anticipate it,
and by acquiring his holdings before general attention should be
turned that way, to obtain of the best.

He was without money, and practically without friends; while
Government and State lands cost respectively two dollars and a half
and a dollar and a quarter an acre, cash down.  But he relied on the
good sense of capitalists to perceive, from the statistics which
his explorations would furnish, the wonderful advantage of logging
a new country with the chain of Great Lakes as shipping outlet at
its very door.  In return for his information, he would expect a
half interest in the enterprise.  This is the usual method of
procedure adopted by landlookers everywhere.

We have said that the country was quite new to logging, but the
statement is not strictly accurate.  Thorpe was by no means the
first to see the money in northern pine.  Outside the big mill
districts already named, cuttings of considerable size were already
under way, the logs from which were usually sold to the mills of
Marquette or Menominee.  Here and there along the best streams,
men had already begun operations.

But they worked on a small scale and with an eye to the immediate
present only; bending their efforts to as large a cut as possible
each season rather than to the acquisition of holdings for future
operations.  This they accomplished naively by purchasing one forty
and cutting a dozen.  Thorpe's map showed often near the forks of
an important stream a section whose coloring indicated private
possession.  Legally the owners had the right only to the pine
included in the marked sections; but if anyone had taken the trouble
to visit the district, he would have found operations going on for
miles up and down stream.  The colored squares would prove to be
nothing but so many excuses for being on the ground.  The bulk of
the pine of any season's cut he would discover had been stolen from
unbought State or Government land.

This in the old days was a common enough trick.  One man, at present
a wealthy and respected citizen, cut for six years, and owned just
one forty-acres!  Another logged nearly fifty million feet from an
eighty!  In the State to-day live prominent business men, looked
upon as models in every way, good fellows, good citizens, with sons
and daughters proud of their social position, who, nevertheless,
made the bulk of their fortunes by stealing Government pine.

"What you want to-day, old man?" inquired a wholesale lumber dealer
of an individual whose name now stands for domestic and civic virtue.

"I'll have five or six million saw logs to sell you in the spring,
and I want to know what you'll give for them."

"Go on!" expostulated the dealer with a laugh, "ain't you got that
forty all cut yet?"

"She holds out pretty well," replied the other with a grin.

An official, called the Inspector, is supposed to report such
stealings, after which another official is to prosecute.  Aside
from the fact that the danger of discovery is practically zero in
so wild and distant a country, it is fairly well established that
the old-time logger found these two individuals susceptible to the
gentle art of "sugaring."  The officials, as well as the lumberman,
became rich.  If worst came to worst, and investigation seemed
imminent, the operator could still purchase the land at legal rates,
and so escape trouble.  But the intention to appropriate was there,
and, to confess the truth, the whitewashing by purchase needed but
rarely to be employed.  I have time and again heard landlookers
assert that the old Land Offices were rarely "on the square," but
as to that I cannot, of course, venture an opinion.

Thorpe was perfectly conversant with this state of affairs.  He
knew, also, that in all probability many of the colored districts
on his map represented firms engaged in steals of greater or less
magnitude.  He was further aware that most of the concerns stole
the timber because it was cheaper to steal than to buy; but that
they would buy readily enough if forced to do so in order to
prevent its acquisition by another.  This other might be himself.
In his exploration, therefore, he decided to employ the utmost
circumspection.  As much as possible he purposed to avoid other
men; but if meetings became inevitable, he hoped to mask his real
intentions.  He would pose as a hunter and fisherman.

During the course of his week in the woods, he discovered that
he would be forced eventually to resort to this expedient.  He
encountered quantities of fine timber in the country through which
he travelled, and some day it would be logged, but at present the
difficulties were too great.  The streams were shallow, or they did
not empty into a good shipping port.  Investors would naturally
look first for holdings along the more practicable routes.

A cursory glance sufficed to show that on such waters the little red
squares had already blocked a foothold for other owners.  Thorpe
surmised that he would undoubtedly discover fine unbought timber
along their banks, but that the men already engaged in stealing it
would hardly be likely to allow him peaceful acquisition.

For a week, then, he journeyed through magnificent timber without
finding what he sought, working always more and more to the north,
until finally he stood on the shores of Superior.  Up to now the
streams had not suited him.  He resolved to follow the shore west
to the mouth of a fairly large river called the Ossawinamakee.*
It showed, in common with most streams of its size, land already
taken, but Thorpe hoped to find good timber nearer the mouth.  After
several days' hard walking with this object in view, he found himself
directly north of a bend in the river; so, without troubling to hunt
for its outlet into Superior, he turned through the woods due south,
with the intention of striking in on the stream.  This he succeeded
in accomplishing some twenty miles inland, where also he discovered
a well-defined and recently used trail leading up the river.  Thorpe
camped one night at the bend, and then set out to follow the trail.

*Accent the last syllable.


It led him for upwards of ten miles nearly due south, sometimes
approaching, sometimes leaving the river, but keeping always in its
direction.  The country in general was rolling.  Low parallel ridges
of gentle declivity glided constantly across his way, their valleys
sloping to the river.  Thorpe had never seen a grander forest of
pine than that which clothed them.

For almost three miles, after the young man had passed through a
preliminary jungle of birch, cedar, spruce, and hemlock, it ran
without a break, clear, clean, of cloud-sweeping altitude, without
underbrush.  Most of it was good bull-sap, which is known by the
fineness of the bark, though often in the hollows it shaded gradually
into the rough-skinned cork pine.  In those days few people paid
any attention to the Norway, and hemlock was not even thought of.
With every foot of the way Thorpe became more and more impressed.

At first the grandeur, the remoteness, the solemnity of the virgin
forest fell on his spirit with a kind of awe.  The tall, straight
trunks lifted directly upwards to the vaulted screen through which
the sky seemed as remote as the ceiling of a Roman church.  Ravens
wheeled and croaked in the blue, but infinitely far away.  Some
lesser noises wove into the stillness without breaking the web of
its splendor, for the pine silence laid soft, hushing fingers on
the lips of those who might waken the sleeping sunlight.

Then the spirit of the pioneer stirred within his soul.  The
wilderness sent forth its old-time challenge to the hardy.  In
him awoke that instinct which, without itself perceiving the end on
which it is bent, clears the way for the civilization that has been
ripening in old-world hot-houses during a thousand years.  Men must
eat; and so the soil must be made productive.  We regret, each after
his manner, the passing of the Indian, the buffalo, the great pine
forests, for they are of the picturesque; but we live gladly on the
product of the farms that have taken their places.  Southern Michigan
was once a pine forest: now the twisted stump-fences about the most
fertile farms of the north alone break the expanse of prairie and
of trim "wood-lots."

Thorpe knew little of this, and cared less.  These feathered trees,
standing close-ranked and yet each isolate in the dignity and
gravity of a sphinx of stone set to dancing his blood of the
frontiersman.  He spread out his map to make sure that so valuable
a clump of timber remained still unclaimed.  A few sections lying
near the headwaters were all he found marked as sold.  He resumed
his tramp light-heartedly.

At the ten-mile point he came upon a dam.  It was a crude dam,--built
of logs,--whose face consisted of strong buttresses slanted up-
stream, and whose sheer was made of unbarked timbers laid smoothly
side by side at the required angle.  At present its gate was open.
Thorpe could see that it was an unusually large gate, with a powerful
apparatus for the raising and the lowering of it.

The purpose of the dam in this new country did not puzzle him in
the least, but its presence bewildered him.  Such constructions are
often thrown across logging streams at proper intervals in order
that the operator may be independent of the spring freshets.  When
he wishes to "drive" his logs to the mouth of the stream, he
first accumulates a head of water behind his dams, and then, by
lifting the gates, creates an artificial freshet sufficient to
float his timber to the pool formed by the next dam below.  The
device is common enough; but it is expensive.  People do not build
dams except in the certainty of some years of logging, and quite
extensive logging at that.  If the stream happens to be navigable,
the promoter must first get an Improvement Charter from a board of
control appointed by the State.  So Thorpe knew that he had to deal,
not with a hand-to-mouth-timber-thief, but with a great company
preparing to log the country on a big scale.

He continued his journey.  At noon he came to another and similar
structure.  The pine forest had yielded to knolls of hardwood
separated by swamp-holes of blackthorn.  Here he left his pack and
pushed ahead in light marching order.  About eight miles above the
first dam, and eighteen from the bend of the river, he ran into a
"slashing" of the year before.  The decapitated stumps were already
beginning to turn brown with weather, the tangle of tops and limbs
was partially concealed by poplar growths and wild raspberry vines.
Parenthetically, it may be remarked that the promptitude with which
these growths succeed the cutting of the pine is an inexplicable
marvel.  Clear forty acres at random in the very center of a pine
forest, without a tract of poplar within an hundred miles; the next
season will bring up the fresh shoots.  Some claim that blue jays
bring the seeds in their crops.  Others incline to the theory that
the creative elements lie dormant in the soil, needing only the sun
to start them to life.  Final speculation is impossible, but the
fact stands.

To Thorpe this particular clearing became at once of the greatest
interest.  He scrambled over and through the ugly debris which for a
year or two after logging operations cumbers the ground.  By a rather
prolonged search he found what he sought,--the "section corners" of
the tract, on which the government surveyor had long ago marked the
"descriptions."  A glance at the map confirmed his suspicions.  The
slashing lay some two miles north of the sections designated as
belonging to private parties.  It was Government land.

Thorpe sat down, lit a pipe, and did a little thinking.

As an axiom it may be premised that the shorter the distance logs
have to be transported, the less it costs to get them in.  Now
Thorpe had that very morning passed through beautiful timber lying
much nearer the mouth of the river than either this, or the sections
further south.  Why had these men deliberately ascended the stream?
Why had they stolen timber eighteen miles from the bend, when they
could equally well have stolen just as good fourteen miles nearer
the terminus of their drive?

Thorpe ruminated for some time without hitting upon a solution.
Then suddenly he remembered the two dams, and his idea that the men
in charge of the river must be wealthy and must intend operating on
a large scale.  He thought he glimpsed it.  After another pipe, he
felt sure.

The Unknowns were indeed going in on a large scale.  They intended
eventually to log the whole of the Ossawinamakee basin.  For this
reason they had made their first purchase, planted their first
foot-hold, near the headwaters.  Furthermore, located as they were
far from a present or an immediately future civilization, they had
felt safe in leaving for the moment their holdings represented by
the three sections already described.  Some day they would buy all
the standing Government pine in the basin; but in the meantime they
would steal all they could at a sufficient distance from the lake to
minimize the danger of discovery.  They had not dared to appropriate
the three mile tract Thorpe had passed through, because in that
locality the theft would probably be remarked, so they intended
eventually to buy it.  Until that should become necessary, however,
every stick cut meant so much less to purchase.

"They're going to cut, and keep on cutting, working down river as
fast as they can," argued Thorpe.  "If anything happens so they
have to, they'll buy in the pine that is left; but if things go
well with them, they'll take what they can for nothing.  They're
getting this stuff out up-river first, because they can steal safer
while the country is still unsettled; and even when it does fill up,
there will not be much likelihood of an investigation so far in-
country,--at least until after they have folded their tents."

It seems to us who are accustomed to the accurate policing of our
twentieth century, almost incredible that such wholesale robberies
should have gone on with so little danger of detection.  Certainly
detection was a matter of sufficient simplicity.  Someone happens
along, like Thorpe, carrying a Government map in his pocket.  He
runs across a parcel of unclaimed land already cut over.  It would
seem easy to lodge a complaint, institute a prosecution against the
men known to have put in the timber.  BUT IT IS ALMOST NEVER DONE.

Thorpe knew that men occupied in so precarious a business would be
keenly on the watch.  At the first hint of rivalry, they would buy
in the timber they had selected.  But the situation had set his
fighting blood to racing.  The very fact that these men were thieves
on so big a scale made him the more obstinately determined to thwart
them.  They undoubtedly wanted the tract down river.  Well, so did he!

He purposed to look it over carefully, to ascertain its exact
boundaries and what sections it would be necessary to buy in order
to include it, and perhaps even to estimate it in a rough way.  In
the accomplishment of this he would have to spend the summer, and
perhaps part of the fall, in that district.  He could hardly expect
to escape notice.  By the indications on the river, he judged that a
crew of men had shortly before taken out a drive of logs.  After the
timber had been rafted and towed to Marquette, they would return.
He might be able to hide in the forest, but sooner or later, he was
sure, one of the company's landlookers or hunters would stumble on
his camp.  Then his very concealment would tell them what he was
after.  The risk was too great.  For above all things Thorpe needed
time.  He had, as has been said, to ascertain what he could offer.
Then he had to offer it.  He would be forced to interest capital,
and that is a matter of persuasion and leisure.

Finally his shrewd, intuitive good-sense flashed the solution on him.
He returned rapidly to his pack, assumed the straps, and arrived at
the first dam about dark of the long summer day.

There he looked carefully about him.  Some fifty feet from the
water's edge a birch knoll supported, besides the birches, a single
big hemlock.  With his belt ax, Thorpe cleared away the little white
trees.  He stuck the sharpened end of one of them in the bark of the
shaggy hemlock, fastened the other end in a crotch eight or ten feet
distant, slanted the rest of the saplings along one side of this
ridge pole, and turned in, after a hasty supper, leaving the
completion of his permanent camp to the morrow.



Chapter XVII


In the morning he thatched smooth the roof of the shelter, using
for the purpose the thick branches of hemlocks; placed two green
spruce logs side by side as cooking range; slung his pot on a rod
across two forked sticks; cut and split a quantity of wood; spread
his blankets; and called himself established.  His beard was already
well grown, and his clothes had become worn by the brush and faded
by the sun and rain.  In the course of the morning he lay in wait
very patiently near a spot overflowed by the river, where, the day
before, he had noticed lily-pads growing.  After a time a doe and a
spotted fawn came and stood ankle-deep in the water, and ate of the
lily-pads.  Thorpe lurked motionless behind his screen of leaves;
and as he had taken the precaution so to station himself that his
hiding-place lay downwind, the beautiful animals were unaware of
his presence.

By and by a prong-buck joined them.  He was a two-year-old, young,
tender, with the velvet just off his antlers.  Thorpe aimed at his
shoulder, six inches above the belly-line, and pressed the trigger.
As though by enchantment the three woods creatures disappeared.  But
the hunter had noticed that, whereas the doe and fawn flourished
bravely the broad white flags of their tails, the buck had seemed
but a streak of brown.  By this he knew he had hit.

Sure enough, after two hundred yards of following the prints of
sharp hoofs and occasional gobbets of blood on the leaves, he came
upon his prey dead.  It became necessary to transport the animal to
camp.  Thorpe stuck his hunting knife deep into the front of the
deer's chest, where the neck joins, which allowed most of the blood
to drain away.  Then he fastened wild grape vines about the antlers,
and, with a little exertion drew the body after him as though it had
been a toboggan.

It slid more easily than one would imagine, along the grain; but not
as easily as by some other methods with which Thorpe was unfamiliar.

At camp he skinned the deer, cut most of the meat into thin strips
which he salted and placed in the sun to dry, and hung the remainder
in a cool arbor of boughs.  The hide he suspended over a pole.

All these things he did hastily, as though he might be in a hurry;
as indeed he was.

At noon he cooked himself a venison steak and some tea.  Then with
his hatchet he cut several small pine poles, which he fashioned
roughly in a number of shapes and put aside for the future.  The
brains of the deer, saved for the purpose, he boiled with water in
his tin pail, wishing it were larger.  With the liquor thus obtained
he intended later to remove the hair and grain from the deer hide.
Toward evening he caught a dozen trout in the pool below the dam.
These he ate for supper.

Next day he spread the buck's hide out on the ground and drenched
it liberally with the product of deer-brains.  Later the hide was
soaked in the river, after which, by means of a rough two-handled
spatula, Thorpe was enabled after much labor to scrape away
entirely the hair and grain.  He cut from the edge of the hide a
number of long strips of raw-hide, but anointed the body of the
skin liberally with the brain liquor.

"Glad I don't have to do that every day!" he commented, wiping his
brow with the back of his wrist.

As the skin dried he worked and kneaded it to softness.  The result
was a fair quality of white buckskin, the first Thorpe had ever
made.  If wetted, it would harden dry and stiff.  Thorough smoking
in the fumes of punk maple would obviate this, but that detail Thorpe
left until later.

"I don't know whether it's all necessary," he said to himself
doubtfully, "but if you're going to assume a disguise, let it
be a good one."

In the meantime, he had bound together with his rawhide thongs
several of the oddly shaped pine timbers to form a species of
dead-fall trap.  It was slow work, for Thorpe's knowledge of such
things was theoretical.  He had learned his theory well, however,
and in the end arrived.

All this time he had made no effort to look over the pine, nor did
he intend to begin until he could be sure of doing so in safety.
His object now was to give his knoll the appearances of a trapper's
camp.

Towards the end of the week he received his first visit.  Evening
was drawing on, and Thorpe was busily engaged in cooking a panful
of trout, resting the frying pan across the two green spruce logs
between which glowed the coals.  Suddenly he became aware of a
presence at his side.  How it had reached the spot he could not
imagine, for he had heard no approach.  He looked up quickly.

"How do," greeted the newcomer gravely.

The man was an Indian, silent, solemn, with the straight, unwinking
gaze of his race.

"How do," replied Thorpe.

The Indian without further ceremony threw his pack to the ground,
and, squatting on his heels, watched the white man's preparations.
When the meal was cooked, he coolly produced a knife, selected a
clean bit of hemlock bark, and helped himself.  Then he lit a pipe,
and gazed keenly about him.  The buckskin interested him.

"No good," said he, feeling of its texture.

Thorpe laughed.  "Not very," he confessed.

"Good," continued the Indian, touching lightly his own moccasins.

"What you do?" he inquired after a long silence, punctuated by
the puffs of tobacco.

"Hunt; trap; fish," replied Thorpe with equal sententiousness.

"Good," concluded the Indian, after a ruminative pause.

That night he slept on the ground.  Next day he made a better
shelter than Thorpe's in less than half the time; and was off
hunting before the sun was an hour high.  He was armed with an
old-fashioned smooth-bore muzzle-loader; and Thorpe was astonished,
after he had become better acquainted with his new companion's
methods, to find that he hunted deer with fine bird shot.  The
Indian never expected to kill or even mortally wound his game;
but he would follow for miles the blood drops caused by his little
wounds, until the animals in sheer exhaustion allowed him to
approach close enough for a dispatching blow.  At two o'clock he
returned with a small buck, tied scientifically together for
toting, with the waste parts cut away, but every ounce of utility
retained.

"I show," said the Indian:--and he did.  Thorpe learned the Indian
tan; of what use are the hollow shank bones; how the spinal cord is
the toughest, softest, and most pliable sewing-thread known.

The Indian appeared to intend making the birch-knoll his permanent
headquarters.  Thorpe was at first a little suspicious of his new
companion, but the man appeared scrupulously honest, was never
intrusive, and even seemed genuinely desirous of teaching the white
little tricks of the woods brought to their perfection by the Indian
alone.  He ended by liking him.  The two rarely spoke.  They merely
sat near each other, and smoked.  One evening the Indian suddenly
remarked:

"You look 'um tree."

"What's that?" cried Thorpe, startled.

"You no hunter, no trapper.  You look 'um tree, for make 'um lumber."

The white had not begun as yet his explorations.  He did not dare
until the return of the logging crew or the passing of someone in
authority at the up-river camp, for he wished first to establish
in their minds the innocence of his intentions.

"What makes you think that, Charley?" he asked.

"You good man in woods," replied Injin Charley sententiously, "I
tell by way you look at him pine."

Thorpe ruminated.

"Charley," said he, "why are you staying here with me?"

"Big frien'," replied the Indian promptly.

"Why are you my friend?  What have I ever done for you?"

"You gottum chief's eye," replied his companion with simplicity.

Thorpe looked at the Indian again.  There seemed to be only one
course.

"Yes, I'm a lumberman," he confessed, "and I'm looking for pine.
But, Charley, the men up the river must not know what I'm after."

"They gettum pine," interjected the Indian like a flash.

"Exactly," replied Thorpe, surprised afresh at the other's
perspicacity.

"Good!" ejaculated Injin Charley, and fell silent.

With this, the longest conversation the two had attempted in their
peculiar acquaintance, Thorpe was forced to be content.  He was,
however, ill at ease over the incident.  It added an element of
uncertainty to an already precarious position.

Three days later he was intensely thankful the conversation had
taken place.

After the noon meal he lay on his blanket under the hemlock shelter,
smoking and lazily watching Injin Charley busy at the side of the
trail.  The Indian had terminated a long two days' search by toting
from the forest a number of strips of the outer bark of white birch,
in its green state pliable as cotton, thick as leather, and light as
air.  These he had cut into arbitrary patterns known only to himself,
and was now sewing as a long shapeless sort of bag or sac to a slender
beech-wood oval.  Later it was to become a birch-bark canoe, and the
beech-wood oval would be the gunwale.

So idly intent was Thorpe on this piece of construction that he did
not notice the approach of two men from the down-stream side.  They
were short, alert men, plodding along with the knee-bent persistency
of the woods-walker, dressed in broad hats, flannel shirts, coarse
trousers tucked in high laced "cruisers "; and carrying each a
bulging meal sack looped by a cord across the shoulders and chest.
Both were armed with long slender scaler's rules.  The first
intimation Thorpe received of the presence of these two men was
the sound of their voices addressing Injin Charley.

"Hullo Charley," said one of them, "what you doing here?  Ain't
seen you since th' Sturgeon district."

"Mak' 'um canoe," replied Charley rather obviously.

"So I see.  But what you expect to get in this Godforsaken country?"

"Beaver, muskrat, mink, otter."

"Trapping, eh?" The man gazed keenly at Thorpe's recumbent figure.

"Who's the other fellow?"

Thorpe held his breath; then exhaled it in a long sigh of relief.

"Him white man," Injin Charley was replying, "him hunt too.  He
mak' 'um buckskin."

The landlooker arose lazily and sauntered toward the group.  It was
part of his plan to be well recognized so that in the future he
might arouse no suspicions.

"Howdy," he drawled, "got any smokin'?"

"How are you," replied one of the scalers, eying him sharply, and
tendering his pouch.  Thorpe filled his pipe deliberately, and
returned it with a heavy-lidded glance of thanks.  To all appearances
he was one of the lazy, shiftless white hunters of the backwoods.
Seized with an inspiration, he said, "What sort of chances is they
at your camp for a little flour?  Me and Charley's about out.  I'll
bring you meat; or I'll make you boys moccasins.  I got some good
buckskin."

It was the usual proposition.

"Pretty good, I guess.  Come up and see," advised the scaler.  "The
crew's right behind us."

"I'll send up Charley," drawled Thorpe, "I'm busy now makin' traps,"
he waved his pipe, calling attention to the pine and rawhide dead-
falls.

They chatted a few moments, practically and with an eye to the
strict utility of things about them, as became woodsmen.  Then two
wagons creaked lurching by, followed by fifteen or twenty men.  The

last of these, evidently the foreman, was joined by the two scalers.

"What's that outfit?" he inquired with the sharpness of suspicion.

"Old Injin Charley--you remember, the old boy that tanned that buck
for you down on Cedar Creek."

"Yes, but the other fellow."

"Oh, a hunter," replied the scaler carelessly.

"Sure?"

The man laughed.  "Couldn't be nothin' else," he asserted with
confidence.  "Regular old backwoods mossback."

At the same time Injin Charley was setting about the splitting of
a cedar log.

"You see," he remarked, "I big frien'."



Chapter XVIII


In the days that followed, Thorpe cruised about the great woods.  It
was slow business, but fascinating.  He knew that when he should
embark on his attempt to enlist considerable capital in an "unsight
unseen" investment, he would have to be well supplied with statistics.
True, he was not much of a timber estimator, nor did he know the
methods usually employed, but his experience, observation, and reading
had developed a latent sixth sense by which he could appreciate
quality, difficulties of logging, and such kindred practical matters.

First of all he walked over the country at large, to find where the
best timber lay.  This was a matter of tramping; though often on an
elevation he succeeded in climbing a tall tree whence he caught
bird's-eye views of the country at large.  He always carried his gun
with him, and was prepared at a moment's notice to seem engaged in
hunting,--either for game or for spots in which later to set his
traps.  The expedient was, however, unnecessary.

Next he ascertained the geographical location of the different
clumps and forests, entering the sections, the quarter-sections,
even the separate forties in his note-book; taking in only the
"descriptions" containing the best pine.

Finally he wrote accurate notes concerning the topography of each
and every pine district,--the lay of the land; the hills, ravines,
swamps, and valleys; the distance from the river; the character of
the soil.  In short, he accumulated all the information he could by
which the cost of logging might be estimated.

The work went much quicker than he had anticipated, mainly because
he could give his entire attention to it.  Injin Charley attended to
the commissary, with a delight in the process that removed it from
the category of work.  When it rained, an infrequent occurrence, the
two hung Thorpe's rubber blankets before the opening of the driest
shelter, and waited philosophically for the weather to clear.  Injin
Charley had finished the first canoe, and was now leisurely at work
on another.  Thorpe had filled his note-book with the class of
statistics just described.  He decided now to attempt an estimate
of the timber.

For this he had really too little experience.  He knew it, but
determined to do his best.  The weak point of his whole scheme
lay in that it was going to be impossible for him to allow the
prospective purchaser a chance of examining the pine.  That
difficulty Thorpe hoped to overcome by inspiring personal confidence
in himself.  If he failed to do so, he might return with a landlooker
whom the investor trusted, and the two could re-enact the comedy
of this summer.  Thorpe hoped, however, to avoid the necessity.
It would be too dangerous.  He set about a rough estimate of the
timber.

Injin Charley intended evidently to work up a trade in buckskin
during the coming winter.  Although the skins were in poor condition
at this time of the year, he tanned three more, and smoked them.  In
the day-time he looked the country over as carefully as did Thorpe.
But he ignored the pines, and paid attention only to the hardwood
and the beds of little creeks.  Injin Charley was in reality a
trapper, and he intended to get many fine skins in this promising
district.  He worked on his tanning and his canoe-making late in
the afternoon.

One evening just at sunset Thorpe was helping the Indian shape his
craft.  The loose sac of birch-bark sewed to the long beech oval was
slung between two tripods.  Injin Charley had fashioned a number of
thin, flexible cedar strips of certain arbitrary lengths and widths.
Beginning with the smallest of these, Thorpe and his companion were
catching one end under the beech oval, bending the strip bow-shape
inside the sac, and catching again the other side of the oval.  Thus
the spring of the bent cedar, pressing against the inside of the
birch-bark sac, distended it tightly.  The cut of the sac and the
length of the cedar strips gave to the canoe its graceful shape.

The two men bent there at their task, the dull glow of evening
falling upon them.  Behind them the knoll stood out in picturesque
relief against the darker pine, the little shelters, the fire-places
of green spruce, the blankets, the guns, a deer's carcass suspended
by the feet from a cross pole, the drying buckskin on either side.
The river rushed by with a never-ending roar and turmoil.  Through
its shouting one perceived, as through a mist, the still lofty peace
of evening.

A young fellow, hardly more than a boy, exclaimed with keen delight
of the picturesque as his canoe shot around the bend into sight of it.

The canoe was large and powerful, but well filled.  An Indian knelt
in the stern; amidships was well laden with duffle of all
descriptions;
then the young fellow sat in the bow.  He was a bright-faced, eager-
eyed, curly-haired young fellow, all enthusiasm and fire.  His figure
was trim and clean, but rather slender; and his movements were quick
but nervous.  When he stepped carefully out on the flat rock to which
his guide brought the canoe with a swirl of the paddle, one initiated
would have seen that his clothes, while strong and serviceable, had
been bought from a sporting catalogue.  There was a trimness, a
neatness, about them.

"This is a good place," he said to the guide, "we'll camp here."
Then he turned up the steep bank without looking back.

"Hullo!" he called in a cheerful, unembarrassed fashion to Thorpe
and Charley.  "How are you?  Care if I camp here?  What you making?
By Jove! I never saw a canoe made before.  I'm going to watch you.
Keep right at it."

He sat on one of the outcropping boulders and took off his hat.

"Say! you've got a great place here!  You here all summer?  Hullo!
you've got a deer hanging up.  Are there many of 'em around here?
I'd like to kill a deer first rate.  I never have.  It's sort of
out of season now, isn't it?"

"We only kill the bucks," replied Thorpe.

"I like fishing, too," went on the boy; "are there any here?  In
the pool?  John," he called to his guide, "bring me my fishing
tackle."

In a few moments he was whipping the pool with long, graceful drops
of the fly.  He proved to be adept.  Thorpe and Injin Charley stopped
work to watch him.  At first the Indian's stolid countenance seemed
a trifle doubtful.  After a time it cleared.

"Good!  he grunted.

"You do that well," Thorpe remarked.  "Is it difficult?"

"It takes practice," replied the boy.  "See that riffle?"  He whipped
the fly lightly within six inches of a little suction hole; a fish at
once rose and struck.

The others had been little fellows and easily handled.  At the end
of fifteen minutes the newcomer landed a fine two-pounder.

"That must be fun," commented Thorpe.  "I never happened to get in
with fly-fishing.  I'd like to try it sometime."

"Try it now!" urged the boy, enchanted that he could teach a woodsman
anything.

"No," Thorpe declined, "not to-night, to-morrow perhaps."

The other Indian had by now finished the erection of a tent, and
had begun to cook supper over a little sheet-iron camp stove.
Thorpe and Charley could smell ham.

"You've got quite a pantry," remarked Thorpe.

"Won't you eat with me?" proffered the boy hospitably.

But Thorpe declined.  He could, however, see canned goods, hard
tack, and condensed milk.

In the course of the evening the boy approached the older man's
camp, and, with a charming diffidence, asked permission to sit
awhile at their fire.

He was full of delight over everything that savored of the woods,
or woodscraft.  The most trivial and everyday affairs of the life
interested him.  His eager questions, so frankly proffered, aroused
even the taciturn Charley to eloquence.  The construction of the
shelter, the cut of a deer's hide, the simple process of "jerking"
venison,--all these awakened his enthusiasm.

"It must be good to live in the woods," he said with a sigh, "to do
all things for yourself.  It's so free!"

The men's moccasins interested him.  He asked a dozen questions
about them,--how they were cut, whether they did not hurt the feet,
how long they would wear.  He seemed surprised to learn that they
are excellent in cold weather.

"I thought ANY leather would wet through in the snow!" he cried.
"I wish I could get a pair somewhere!" he exclaimed.  "You don't
know where I could buy any, do you?" he asked of Thorpe.

"I don't know," answered he, "perhaps Charley here will make you
a pair."

"WILL you, Charley?" cried the boy.

"I mak' him," replied the Indian stolidly.

The many-voiced night of the woods descended close about the little
camp fire, and its soft breezes wafted stray sparks here and there
like errant stars.  The newcomer, with shining eyes, breathed deep
in satisfaction.  He was keenly alive to the romance, the grandeur,
the mystery, the beauty of the littlest things, seeming to derive a
deep and solid contentment from the mere contemplation of the woods
and its ways and creatures.

"I just DO love this!" he cried again and again.  "Oh, it's great,
after all that fuss down there!" and he cried it so fervently that
the other men present smiled; but so genuinely that the smile had
in it nothing but kindliness.

"I came out for a month," said he suddenly, "and I guess I'll stay
the rest of it right here.  You'll let me go with you sometimes
hunting, won't you?" he appealed to them with the sudden open-
heartedness of a child.  "I'd like first rate to kill a deer."

"Sure," said Thorpe, "glad to have you."

"My name is Wallace Carpenter," said the boy with a sudden
unmistakable air of good-breeding.

"Well," laughed Thorpe, "two old woods loafers like us haven't got
much use for names.  Charley here is called Geezigut, and mine's
nearly as bad; but I guess plain Charley and Harry will do."

"All right, Harry," replied Wallace.

After the young fellow had crawled into the sleeping bag which his
guide had spread for him over a fragrant layer of hemlock and
balsam, Thorpe and his companion smoked one more pipe.  The whip-
poor-wills called back and forth across the river.  Down in the
thicket, fine, clear, beautiful, like the silver thread of a dream,
came the notes of the white-throat--the nightingale of the North.
Injin Charley knocked the last ashes from his pipe.

"Him nice boy!" said he.



Chapter XIX


The young fellow stayed three weeks, and was a constant joy to Thorpe.
His enthusiasms were so whole-souled; his delight so perpetual; his
interest so fresh!  The most trivial expedients of woods lore seemed
to him wonderful.  A dozen times a day he exclaimed in admiration or
surprise over some bit of woodcraft practiced by Thorpe or one of the
Indians.

"Do you mean to say you have lived here six weeks and only brought
in what you could carry on your backs!" he cried.

"Sure," Thorpe replied.

"Harry, you're wonderful!  I've got a whole canoe load, and imagined
I was travelling light and roughing it.  You beat Robinson Crusoe!
He had a whole ship to draw from."

"My man Friday helps me out," answered Thorpe, laughingly indicating
Injin Charley.

Nearly a week passed before Wallace managed to kill a deer.  The
animals were plenty enough; but the young man's volatile and eager
attention stole his patience.  And what few running shots offered,
he missed, mainly because of buck fever.  Finally, by a lucky chance,
he broke a four-year-old's neck, dropping him in his tracks.  The
hunter was delighted.  He insisted on doing everything for himself--
cruel hard work it was too--including the toting and skinning.  Even
the tanning he had a share in.  At first he wanted the hide cured,
"with the hair on." Injin Charley explained that the fur would drop
out.  It was the wrong season of the year for pelts.

"Then we'll have buckskin and I'll get a buckskin shirt out of
it," suggested Wallace.

Injin Charley agreed.  One day Wallace returned from fishing in
the pool to find that the Indian had cut out the garment, and was
already sewing it together.

"Oh!" he cried, a little disappointed, "I wanted to see it done!"

Injin Charley merely grunted.  To make a buckskin shirt requires the
hides of three deer.  Charley had supplied the other two, and wished
to keep the young man from finding it out.

Wallace assumed the woods life as a man would assume an unaccustomed
garment.  It sat him well, and he learned fast, but he was always
conscious of it.  He liked to wear moccasins, and a deer knife; he
liked to cook his own supper, or pluck the fragrant hemlock browse
for his pillow.  Always he seemed to be trying to realize and to
savor fully the charm, the picturesqueness, the romance of all that
he was doing and seeing.  To Thorpe these things were a part of
everyday life; matters of expedient or necessity.  He enjoyed them,
but subconsciously, as one enjoys an environment.  Wallace trailed
the cloak of his glories in frank admiration of their splendor.

This double point of view brought the men very close together.
Thorpe liked the boy because he was open-hearted, free from
affectation, assumptive of no superiority,--in short, because he
was direct and sincere, although in a manner totally different from
Thorpe's own directness and sincerity.  Wallace, on his part, adored
in Thorpe the free, open-air life, the adventurous quality, the
quiet hidden power, the resourcefulness and self-sufficiency of the
pioneer.  He was too young as yet to go behind the picturesque or
romantic; so he never thought to inquire of himself what Thorpe
did there in the wilderness, or indeed if he did anything at all.
He accepted Thorpe for what he thought him to be, rather than for
what he might think him to be.  Thus he reposed unbounded confidence
in him.

After a while, observing the absolute ingenuousness of the boy,
Thorpe used to take him from time to time on some of his daily
trips to the pines.  Necessarily he explained partially his position
and the need of secrecy.  Wallace was immensely excited and important
at learning a secret of such moment, and deeply flattered at being
entrusted with it.

Some may think that here, considering the magnitude of the
interests involved, Thorpe committed an indiscretion.  It may be;
but if so, it was practically an inevitable indiscretion.  Strong,
reticent characters like Thorpe's prove the need from time to time
of violating their own natures, of running counter to their ordinary
habits of mind and deed.  It is a necessary relaxation of the
strenuous, a debauch of the soul.  Its analogy in the lower plane
is to be found in the dissipations of men of genius; or still lower
in the orgies of fighters out of training.  Sooner or later Thorpe
was sure to emerge for a brief space from that iron-bound silence
of the spirit, of which he himself was the least aware.  It was
not so much a hunger for affection, as the desire of a strong man
temporarily to get away from his strength.  Wallace Carpenter became
in his case the exception to prove the rule.

Little by little the eager questionings of the youth extracted a
full statement of the situation.  He learned of the timber-thieves
up the river, of their present operations; and their probable
plans; of the valuable pine lying still unclaimed; of Thorpe's
stealthy raid into the enemy's country.  It looked big to him,
epic!--These were tremendous forces in motion, here was intrigue,
here was direct practical application of the powers he had been
playing with.

"Why, it's great!  It's better than any book I ever read!"

He wanted to know what he could do to help.

"Nothing except keep quiet," replied Thorpe, already uneasy, not
lest the boy should prove unreliable, but lest his very eagerness
to seem unconcerned should arouse suspicion.  "You mustn't try to
act any different.  If the men from up-river come by, be just as
cordial to them as you can, and don't act mysterious and important."

"All right," agreed Wallace, bubbling with excitement.  "And then
what do you do--after you get the timber estimated?"

"I'll go South and try, quietly, to raise some money.  That will be
difficult, because, you see, people don't know me; and I am not in
a position to let them look over the timber.  Of course it will be
merely a question of my judgment.  They can go themselves to the
Land Office and pay their money.  There won't be any chance of my
making way with that.  The investors will become possessed of certain
'descriptions' lying in this country, all right enough.  The rub is,
will they have enough confidence in me and my judgment to believe the
timber to be what I represent it?"

"I see," commented Wallace, suddenly grave.

That evening Injin Charley went on with his canoe building.  He
melted together in a pot, resin and pitch.  The proportion he
determined by experiment, for the mixture had to be neither hard
enough to crack nor soft enough to melt in the sun.  Then he daubed
the mess over all the seams.  Wallace superintended the operation
for a time in silence.

"Harry," he said suddenly with a crisp decision new to his voice,
"will you take a little walk with me down by the dam.  I want to
talk with you."

They strolled to the edge of the bank and stood for a moment
looking at the swirling waters.

"I want you to tell me all about logging," began Wallace.  "Start
from the beginning.  Suppose, for instance, you had bought this pine
here we were talking about,--what would be your first move?"

They sat side by side on a log, and Thorpe explained.  He told of
the building of the camps, the making of the roads; the cutting,
swamping, travoying, skidding; the banking and driving.  Unconsciously
a little of the battle clang crept into his narrative.  It became a
struggle, a gasping tug and heave for supremacy between the man and
the wilderness.  The excitement of war was in it.  When he had
finished, Wallace drew a deep breath.

"When I am home," said he simply, "I live in a big house on the
Lake Shore Drive.  It is heated by steam and lighted by electricity.
I touch a button or turn a screw, and at once I am lighted and warmed.
At certain hours meals are served me.  I don't know how they are
cooked, or where the materials come from.  Since leaving college I
have spent a little time down town every day; and then I've played
golf or tennis or ridden a horse in the park.  The only real thing
left is the sailing.  The wind blows just as hard and the waves mount
just as high to-day as they did when Drake sailed.  All the rest is
tame.  We do little imitations of the real thing with blue ribbons
tied to them, and think we are camping or roughing it.  This life
of yours is glorious, is vital, it means something in the march of
the world;--and I doubt whether ours does.  You are subduing the
wilderness, extending the frontier.  After you will come the backwoods
farmer to pull up the stumps, and after him the big farmer and the
cities."

The young follow spoke with unexpected swiftness and earnestness.
Thorpe looked at him in surprise.

"I know what you are thinking," said the boy, flushing.  "You are
surprised that I can be in earnest about anything.  I'm out of school
up here.  Let me shout and play with the rest of the children."

Thorpe watched him with sympathetic eyes, but with lips that
obstinately refused to say one word.  A woman would have felt
rebuffed.  The boy's admiration, however, rested on the foundation
of the more manly qualities he had already seen in his friend.
Perhaps this very aloofness, this very silent, steady-eyed power
appealed to him.

"I left college at nineteen because my father died," said he.  "I
am now just twenty-one.  A large estate descended to me, and I have
had to care for its investments all alone.  I have one sister,that
is all."

"So have I," cried Thorpe, and stopped.

"The estates have not suffered," went on the boy simply.  "I have
done well with them.  But," he cried fiercely, "I HATE it!  It is
petty and mean and worrying and nagging!  That's why I was so glad
to get out in the woods."

He paused.

"Have some tobacco," said Thorpe.

Wallace accepted with a nod.

"Now, Harry, I have a proposal to make to you.  It is this; you
need thirty thousand dollars to buy your land.  Let me supply it,
and come in as half partner."

An expression of doubt crossed the landlooker's face.

"Oh PLEASE!" cried the boy, "I do want to get in something real!
It will be the making of me!"

"Now see here," interposed Thorpe suddenly, "you don't even know
my name."

"I know YOU," replied the boy.

"My name is Harry Thorpe," pursued the other.  "My father was
Henry Thorpe, an embezzler."

"Harry," replied Wallace soberly, "I am sorry I made you say that.
I do not care for your name--except perhaps to put it in the articles
of partnership,--and I have no concern with your ancestry.  I tell
you it is a favor to let me in on this deal.  I don't know anything
about lumbering, but I've got eyes.  I can see that big timber
standing up thick and tall, and I know people make profits in the
business.  It isn't a question of the raw material surely, and you
have experience."

"Not so much as you think," interposed Thorpe.

"There remains," went on Wallace without attention to Thorpe's
remark, "only the question of---"

"My honesty," interjected Thorpe grimly.

"No!" cried the boy hotly, "of your letting me in on a good thing!"

Thorpe considered a few moments in silence.

"Wallace," he said gravely at last, "I honestly do think that
whoever goes into this deal with me will make money.  Of course
there's always chances against it.  But I am going to do my best.
I've seen other men fail at it, and the reason they've failed is
because they did not demand success of others and of themselves.
That's it; success!  When a general commanding troops receives a
report on something he's ordered done, he does not trouble himself
with excuses;--he merely asks whether or not the thing was
accomplished.  Difficulties don't count.  It is a soldier's duty
to perform the impossible.  Well, that's the way it ought to be with
us.  A man has no right to come to me and say, 'I failed because
such and such things happened.'  Either he should succeed in spite
of it all; or he should step up and take his medicine without
whining.  Well, I'm going to succeed!"

The man's accustomed aloofness had gone.  His eye flashed, his brow
frowned, the muscles of his cheeks contracted under his beard.  In
the bronze light of evening he looked like a fire-breathing statue
to that great ruthless god he had himself invoked,--Success.

Wallace gazed at him with fascinated admiration.

"Then you will?" he asked tremulously.

"Wallace," he replied again, "they'll say you have been the victim
of an adventurer, but the result will prove them wrong.  If I weren't
perfectly sure of this, I wouldn't think of it, for I like you, and
I know you want to go into this more out of friendship for me and
because your imagination is touched, than from any business sense.
But I'll accept, gladly.  And I'll do my best!"

"Hooray!" cried the boy, throwing his cap up in the air.  "We'll do
'em up in the first round!"

At last when Wallace Carpenter reluctantly quitted his friends on
the Ossawinamakee, he insisted on leaving with them a variety of
the things he had brought.

"I'm through with them," said he.  "Next time I come up here we'll
have a camp of our own, won't we, Harry?  And I do feel that I am
awfully in you fellows' debt.  You've given me the best time I have
ever had in my life, and you've refused payment for the moccasins
and things you've made for me.  I'd feel much better if you'd accept
them,--just as keepsakes."

"All right, Wallace," replied Thorpe, "and much obliged."

"Don't forget to come straight to me when you get through estimating,
now, will you?  Come to the house and stay.  Our compact holds now,
honest Injin; doesn't it?" asked the boy anxiously.

"Honest Injin," laughed Thorpe.  "Good-by."

The little canoe shot away down the current.  The last Injin Charley
and Thorpe saw of the boy was as he turned the curve.  His hat was
off and waving in his hand, his curls were blowing in the breeze,
his eyes sparkled with bright good-will, and his lips parted in a
cheery halloo of farewell.

"Him nice boy," repeated Injin CharIey, turning to his canoe.



Chapter XX


Thus Thorpe and the Indian unexpectedly found themselves in the
possession of luxury.  The outfit had not meant much to Wallace
Carpenter, for he had bought it in the city, where such things are
abundant and excite no remark; but to the woodsman each article
possessed a separate and particular value.  The tent, an iron
kettle, a side of bacon, oatmeal, tea, matches, sugar, some canned
goods, a box of hard-tack,--these, in the woods, represented wealth.
Wallace's rifle chambered the .38 Winchester cartridge, which was
unfortunate, for Thorpe's .44 had barely a magazineful left.

The two men settled again into their customary ways of life.  Things
went much as before, except that the flies and mosquitoes became
thick.  To men as hardened as Thorpe and the Indian, these pests
were not as formidable as they would have been to anyone directly
from the city, but they were sufficiently annoying.  Thorpe's old
tin pail was pressed into service as a smudge-kettle.  Every evening
about dusk, when the insects first began to emerge from the dark
swamps, Charley would build a tiny smoky fire in the bottom of
the pail, feeding it with peat, damp moss, punk maple, and other
inflammable smoky fuel.  This censer swung twice or thrice about the
tent, effectually cleared it.  Besides, both men early established on
their cheeks an invulnerable glaze of a decoction of pine tar, oil,
and a pungent herb.  Towards the close of July, however, the insects
began sensibly to diminish, both in numbers and persistency.

Up to the present Thorpe had enjoyed a clear field.  Now two men
came down from above and established a temporary camp in the woods
half a mile below the dam.  Thorpe soon satisfied himself that they
were picking out a route for the logging road.  Plenty which could
be cut and travoyed directly to the banking ground lay exactly
along the bank of the stream; but every logger possessed of a tract
of timber tries each year to get in some that is easy to handle and
some that is difficult.  Thus the average of expense is maintained.

The two men, of course, did not bother themselves with the timber
to be travoyed, but gave their entire attention to that lying
further back.  Thorpe was enabled thus to avoid them entirely.  He
simply transferred his estimating to the forest by the stream.  Once
he met one of the men; but was fortunately in a country that lent
itself to his pose of hunter.  The other he did not see at all.

But one day he heard him.  The two up-river men were following
carefully but noisily the bed of a little creek.  Thorpe happened to
be on the side-hill, so he seated himself quietly until they should
have moved on down.  One of the men shouted to the other, who,
crashing through a thicket, did not hear.  "Ho-o-o! DYER!" the
first repeated.  "Here's that infernal comer; over here!"

"Yop!" assented the other.  "Coming!"

Thorpe recognized the voice instantly as that of Radway's scaler.
His hand crisped in a gesture of disgust.  The man had always been
obnoxious to him.

Two days later he stumbled on their camp.  He paused in wonder at
what he saw.

The packs lay open, their contents scattered in every direction.
The fire had been hastily extinguished with a bucket of water,
and a frying pan lay where it had been overturned.  If the thing
had been possible, Thorpe would have guessed at a hasty and
unpremeditated flight.

He was about to withdraw carefully lest he be discovered, when
he was startled by a touch on his elbow.  It was Injin Charley.

"Dey go up river," he said.  "I come see what de row."

The Indian examined rapidly the condition of the little camp.

"Dey look for somethin'," said he, making his hand revolve as
though rummaging, and indicating the packs.

"I t'ink dey see you in de woods," he concluded.  "Dey go camp
gettum boss.  Boss he gone on river trail two t'ree hour."

"You're right, Charley," replied Thorpe, who had been drawing his
own conclusions.  "One of them knows me.  They've been looking in
their packs for their note-books with the descriptions of these
sections in them.  Then they piled out for the boss.  If I know
anything at all, the boss'll make tracks for Detroit."

"W'ot you do?" asked Injin Charley curiously.

"I got to get to Detroit before they do; that's all."

Instantly the Indian became all action.

"You come," he ordered, and set out at a rapid pace for camp.

There, with incredible deftness, he packed together about twelve
pounds of the jerked venison and a pair of blankets, thrust Thorpe's
waterproof match safe in his pocket, and turned eagerly to the
young man.

"You come," he repeated.

Thorpe hastily unearthed his "descriptions" and wrapped them up.
The Indian, in silence, rearranged the displaced articles in such a
manner as to relieve the camp of its abandoned air.

It was nearly sundown.  Without a word the two men struck off into
the forest, the Indian in the lead.  Their course was southeast, but
Thorpe asked no questions.  He followed blindly.  Soon he found that
if he did even that adequately, he would have little attention left
for anything else.  The Indian walked with long, swift strides, his
knees always slightly bent, even at the finish of the step, his back
hollowed, his shoulders and head thrust forward.  His gait had a
queer sag in it, up and down in a long curve from one rise to the
other.  After a time Thorpe became fascinated in watching before him
this easy, untiring lope, hour after hour, without the variation of
a second's fraction in speed nor an inch in length.  It was as though
the Indian were made of steel springs.  He never appeared to hurry;
but neither did he ever rest.

At first Thorpe followed him with comparative ease, but at the end
of three hours he was compelled to put forth decided efforts to
keep pace.  His walking was no longer mechanical, but conscious.
When it becomes so, a man soon tires.  Thorpe resented the
inequalities, the stones, the roots, the patches of soft ground
which lay in his way.  He felt dully that they were not fair.  He
could negotiate the distance; but anything else was a gratuitous
insult.

Then suddenly he gained his second wind.  He felt better and stronger
and moved freer.  For second wind is only to a very small degree a
question of the breathing power.  It is rather the response of the
vital forces to a will that refuses to heed their first grumbling
protests.  Like dogs by the fire they do their utmost to convince
their master that the limit of freshness is reached; but at last,
under the whip, spring to their work.

At midnight Injin Charley called a halt.  He spread his blanket;
leaned on one elbow long enough to eat strip of dried meat, and fell
asleep.  Thorpe imitated his example.  Three hours later the Indian
roused his companion, and the two set out again.

Thorpe had walked a leisurely ten days through the woods far to
the north.  In that journey he had encountered many difficulties.
Sometimes he had been tangled for hours at a time in a dense and
almost impenetrable thicket.  Again he had spent a half day in
crossing a treacherous swamp.  Or there had interposed in his trail
abattises of down timber a quarter of a mile wide over which it had
been necessary to pick a precarious way eight or ten feet from the
ground.

This journey was in comparison easy.  Most of the time the travellers
walked along high beech ridges or through the hardwood forests.
Occasionally they were forced to pass into the lowlands, but always
little saving spits of highland reaching out towards each other
abridged the necessary wallowing.  Twice they swam rivers.

At first Thorpe thought this was because the country was more open;
but as he gave better attention to their route, he learned to
ascribe it entirely to the skill of his companion.  The Indian
seemed by a species of instinct to select the most practicable
routes.  He seemed to know how the land ought to lie, so that he was
never deceived by appearances into entering a cul de sac.  His beech
ridges always led to other beech ridges; his hardwood never petered
out into the terrible black swamps.  Sometimes Thorpe became sensible
that they had commenced a long detour; but it was never an abrupt
detour, unforeseen and blind.

From three o'clock until eight they walked continually without a
pause, without an instant's breathing spell.  Then they rested a
half hour, ate a little venison, and smoked a pipe.

An hour after noon they repeated the rest.  Thorpe rose with a
certain physical reluctance.  The Indian seemed as fresh--or as
tired--as when he started.  At sunset they took an hour.  Then
forward again by the dim intermittent light of the moon and stars
through the ghostly haunted forest, until Thorpe thought he would
drop with weariness, and was mentally incapable of contemplating
more than a hundred steps in advance.

"When I get to that square patch of light, I'll quit," he would
say to himself, and struggle painfully the required twenty rods.

"No, I won't quit here," he would continue, "I'll make it that
birch.  Then I'll lie down and die."

And so on.  To the actual physical exhaustion of Thorpe's muscles
was added that immense mental weariness which uncertainty of the
time and distance inflicts on a man.  The journey might last a week,
for all he knew.  In the presence of an emergency these men of action
had actually not exchanged a dozen words.  The Indian led; Thorpe
followed.

When the halt was called, Thorpe fell into his blanket too weary
even to eat.  Next morning sharp, shooting pains, like the stabs
of swords, ran through his groin.

"You come," repeated the Indian, stolid as ever.

When the sun was an hour high the travellers suddenly ran into a
trail, which as suddenly dived into a spruce thicket.  On the other
side of it Thorpe unexpectedly found himself in an extensive
clearing, dotted with the blackened stumps of pines.  Athwart the
distance he could perceive the wide blue horizon of Lake Michigan.
He had crossed the Upper Peninsula on foot!

"Boat come by to-day," said Injin Charley, indicating the tall stacks
of a mill.  "Him no stop.  You mak' him stop take you with him.
You get train Mackinaw City tonight.  Dose men, dey on dat train."

Thorpe calculated rapidly.  The enemy would require, even with their
teams, a day to cover the thirty miles to the fishing village of
Munising, whence the stage ran each morning to Seney, the present
terminal of the South Shore Railroad.  He, Thorpe, on foot and three
hours behind, could never have caught the stage.  But from Seney
only one train a day was despatched to connect at Mackinaw City with
the Michigan Central, and on that one train, due to leave this very
morning, the up-river man was just about pulling out.  He would arrive
at Mackinaw City at four o'clock of the afternoon, where he would be
forced to wait until eight in the evening.  By catching a boat at the
mill to which Injin Charley had led him, Thorpe could still make the
same train.  Thus the start in the race for Detroit's Land Office
would be fair.

"All right," he cried, all his energy returning to him.  "Here
goes!  We'll beat him out yet!"

"You come back?" inquired the Indian, peering with a certain anxiety
into his companion's eyes.

"Come back!" cried Thorpe.  "You bet your hat!"

"I wait," replied the Indian, and was gone.

"Oh, Charley!" shouted Thorpe in surprise.  "Come on and get a square
meal, anyway."

But the Indian was already on his way back to the distant
Ossawinamakee.

Thorpe hesitated in two minds whether to follow and attempt further
persuasion, for he felt keenly the interest the other had displayed.
Then he saw, over the headland to the east, a dense trail of black
smoke.  He set off on a stumbling run towards the mill.



Chapter XXI


He arrived out of breath in a typical little mill town consisting
of the usual unpainted houses, the saloons, mill, office, and
general store.  To the latter he addressed himself for information.

The proprietor, still sleepy, was mopping out the place.

"Does that boat stop here?" shouted Thorpe across the suds.

"Sometimes," replied the man somnolently.

"Not always?"

"Only when there's freight for her."

"Doesn't she stop for passengers?"

"Nope."

"How does she know when there's freight?"

"Oh, they signal her from the mill--" but Thorpe was gone.

At the mill Thorpe dove for the engine room.  He knew that elsewhere
the clang of machinery and the hurry of business would leave scant
attention for him.  And besides, from the engine room the signals
would be given.  He found, as is often the case in north-country
sawmills, a Scotchman in charge.

"Does the boat stop here this morning?" he inquired.

"Weel," replied the engineer with fearful deliberation, "I canna
say.  But I hae received na orders to that effect."

"Can't you whistle her in for me?" asked Thorpe.

"I canna," answered the engineer, promptly enough this time.

"Why not?"

"Ye're na what a body might call freight."

"No other way out of it?"

"Na."

Thorpe was seized with an idea.

"Here!" he cried.  See that boulder over there?  I want to ship that
to Mackinaw City by freight on this boat."

The Scotchman's eyes twinkled appreciatively.

"I'm dootin' ye hae th' freight-bill from the office," he objected
simply.

"See here," replied Thorpe, "I've just got to get that boat.  It's
worth twenty dollars to me, and I'll square it with the captain.
There's your twenty."

The Scotchman deliberated, looking aslant at the ground and
thoughtfully oiling a cylinder with a greasy rag.

"It'll na be a matter of life and death?" he asked hopefully.  "She
aye stops for life and death."

"No," replied Thorpe reluctantly.  Then with an explosion, "Yes, by
God, it is!  If I don't make that boat, I'll kill YOU."

The Scotchman chuckled and pocketed the money.  "I'm dootin' that's
in order," he replied.  "I'll no be party to any such proceedin's.
I'm goin' noo for a fresh pail of watter," he remarked, pausing at
the door, "but as a wee item of information: yander's th' wheestle
rope; and a mon wheestles one short and one long for th' boat."

He disappeared.  Thorpe seized the cord and gave the signal.  Then
he ran hastily to the end of the long lumber docks, and peered with
great eagerness in the direction of the black smoke.

The steamer was as yet concealed behind a low spit of land which
ran out from the west to form one side of the harbor.  In a moment,
however, her bows appeared, headed directly down towards the Straits
of Mackinaw.  When opposite the little bay Thorpe confidently looked
to see her turn in, but to his consternation she held her course.
He began to doubt whether his signal had been heard.  Fresh black
smoke poured from the funnel; the craft seemed to gather speed as
she approached the eastern point.  Thorpe saw his hopes sailing away.
He wanted to stand up absurdly and wave his arms to attract attention
at that impossible distance.  He wanted to sink to the planks in
apathy.  Finally he sat down, and with dull eyes watched the distance
widen between himself and his aims.

And then with a grand free sweep she turned and headed directly for
him.

Other men might have wept or shouted.  Thorpe merely became himself,
imperturbable, commanding, apparently cold.  He negotiated briefly
with the captain, paid twenty dollars more for speed and the
privilege of landing at Mackinaw City.  Then he slept for eight
hours on end and was awakened in time to drop into a small boat
which deposited him on the broad sand beach of the lower peninsula.



Chapter XXII


The train was just leisurely making up for departure.  Thorpe,
dressed as he was in old "pepper and salt" garments patched with
buckskin, his hat a flopping travesty on headgear, his moccasins,
worn and dirty, his face bearded and bronzed, tried as much as
possible to avoid attention.  He sent an instant telegram to
Wallace Carpenter conceived as follows:

"Wire thirty thousand my order care Land Office, Detroit, before
nine o'clock to-morrow morning.  Do it if you have to rustle all
night.  Important."

Then he took a seat in the baggage car on a pile of boxes and
philosophically waited for the train to start.  He knew that sooner
or later the man, provided he were on the train, would stroll through
the car, and he wanted to be out of the way.  The baggage man proved
friendly, so Thorpe chatted with him until after bedtime.  Then he
entered the smoking car and waited patiently for morning.

So far the affair had gone very well.  It had depended on personal
exertions, and he had made it go.  Now he was forced to rely on
outward circumstances.  He argued that the up-river man would have
first to make his financial arrangements before he could buy in the
land, and this would give the landlooker a chance to get in ahead at
the office.  There would probably be no difficulty about that.  The
man suspected nothing.  But Thorpe had to confess himself fearfully
uneasy about his own financial arrangements.  That was the rub.
Wallace Carpenter had been sincere enough in his informal striking
of partnership, but had he retained his enthusiasm?  Had second
thought convicted him of folly?  Had conservative business friends
dissuaded him?  Had the glow faded in the reality of his accustomed
life?  And even if his good-will remained unimpaired, would he be
able, at such short notice, to raise so large a sum?  Would he
realize from Thorpe's telegram the absolute necessity of haste?

At the last thought, Thorpe decided to send a second message from
the next station.  He did so.  It read: "Another buyer of timber on
same train with me.  Must have money at nine o'clock or lose land."
He paid day rates on it to insure immediate delivery.  Suppose the
boy should be away from home!

Everything depended on Wallace Carpenter; and Thorpe could not but
confess the chance slender.  One other thought made the night seem
long.  Thorpe had but thirty dollars left.

Morning came at last, and the train drew in and stopped.  Thorpe,
being in the smoking car, dropped off first and stationed himself
near the exit where he could look over the passengers without being
seen.  They filed past.  Two only he could accord the role of master
lumbermen--the rest were plainly drummers or hayseeds.  And in
these two Thorpe recognized Daly and Morrison themselves.  They
passed within ten feet of him, talking earnestly together.  At the
curb they hailed a cab and drove away.  Thorpe with satisfaction
heard them call the name of a hotel.

It was still two hours before the Land Office would be open.  Thorpe
ate breakfast at the depot and wandered slowly up Jefferson Avenue
to Woodward, a strange piece of our country's medievalism in modern
surroundings.  He was so occupied with his own thoughts that for some
time he remained unconscious of the attention he was attracting.
Then, with a start, he felt that everyone was staring at him.  The
hour was early, so that few besides the working classes were abroad,
but he passed one lady driving leisurely to an early train whose
frank scrutiny brought him to himself.  He became conscious that his
broad hat was weather-soiled and limp, that his flannel shirt was
faded, that his "pepper and salt" trousers were patched, that
moccasins must seem as anachronistic as chain mail.  It abashed him.
He could not know that it was all wild and picturesque, that his
straight and muscular figure moved with a grace quite its own and
the woods', that the bronze of his skin contrasted splendidly with
the clearness of his eye, that his whole bearing expressed the
serene power that comes only from the confidence of battle.  The
woman in the carriage saw it, however.

"He is magnificent!" she cried.  "I thought such men had died
with Cooper!"

Thorpe whirled sharp on his heel and returned at once to a boarding-
house off Fort Street, where he had "outfitted" three months before.
There he reclaimed his valise, shaved, clothed himself in linen and
cheviot once more, and sauntered slowly over to the Land Office to
await its opening.



Chapter XXIII


At nine o'clock neither of the partners had appeared.  Thorpe entered
the office and approached the desk.

"Is there a telegram here for Harry Thorpe?" he inquired.

The clerk to whom he addressed himself merely motioned with his
head toward a young fellow behind the railing in a corner.  The
latter, without awaiting the question, shifted comfortably and
replied:

"No."

At the same instant steps were heard in the corridor, the door opened,
and Mr. Morrison appeared on the sill.  Then Thorpe showed the stuff
of which he was made.

"Is this the desk for buying Government lands?" he asked hurriedly.

"Yes," replied the clerk.

"I have some descriptions I wish to buy in."

"Very well," replied the clerk, "what township?"

Thorpe detailed the figures, which he knew by heart, the clerk took
from a cabinet the three books containing them, and spread them out
on the counter.  At this moment the bland voice of Mr. Morrison made
itself heard at Thorpe's elbow.

"Good morning, Mr. Smithers," it said with the deliberation of the
consciously great man.  "I have a few descriptions I would like to
buy in the northern peninsula."

"Good morning, Mr. Morrison.  Archie there will attend to you.
Archie, see what Mr. Morrison wishes."

The lumberman and the other clerk consulted in a low voice, after
which the official turned to fumble among the records.  Not finding
what he wanted, he approached Smithers.  A whispered consultation
ensued between these two.  Then Smithers called:

"Take a seat, Mr. Morrison.  This gentleman is looking over these
townships, and will have finished in a few minutes."

Morrison's eye suddenly became uneasy.

"I am somewhat busy this morning," he objected with a shade of
command in his voice.

"If this gentleman---?" suggested the clerk delicately.

"I am sorry," put in Thorpe with brevity, "my time, too, is
valuable."

Morrison looked at him sharply.

"My deal is a big one," he snapped.  "I can probably arrange with
this gentleman to let him have his farm."

"I claim precedence," replied Thorpe calmly.

"Well," said Morrison swift as light, "I'll tell you, Smithers.
I'll leave my list of descriptions and a check with you.  Give me
a receipt, and mark my lands off after you've finished with this
gentleman."

Now Government and State lands are the property of the man who pays
for them.  Although the clerk's receipt might not give Morrison a
valid claim; nevertheless it would afford basis for a lawsuit.
Thorpe saw the trap, and interposed.

"Hold on," he interrupted, "I claim precedence.  You can give no
receipt for any land in these townships until after my business is
transacted.  I have reason to believe that this gentleman and myself
are both after the same descriptions."

"What!" shouted Morrison, assuming surprise.

"You will have to await your turn, Mr. Morrison," said the clerk,
virtuous before so many witnesses.

The business man was in a white rage of excitement.

"I insist on my application being filed at once!" he cried waving
his check.  "I have the money right here to pay for every acre of
it; and if I know the law, the first man to pay takes the land."

He slapped the check down on the rail, and hit it a number of times
with the flat of his hand.  Thorpe turned and faced him with a steel
look in his level eyes.

"Mr. Morrison," he said, "you are quite right.  The first man who
pays gets the land; but I have won the first chance to pay.  You
will kindly step one side until I finish my business with Mr.
Smithers here."

"I suppose you have the amount actually with you," said the clerk,
quite respectfully, "because if you have not, Mr. Morrison's claim
will take precedence."

"I would hardly have any business in a land office, if I did not know
that," replied Thorpe, and began his dictation of the description as
calmly as though his inside pocket contained the required amount in
bank bills.

Thorpe's hopes had sunk to zero.  After all, looking at the matter
dispassionately, why should he expect Carpenter to trust him, a
stranger, with so large a sum?  It had been madness.  Only the blind
confidence of the fighting man led him further into the struggle.
Another would have given up, would have stepped aside from the path
of this bona-fide purchaser with the money in his hand.

But Thorpe was of the kind that hangs on until the last possible
second, not so much in the expectation of winning, as in sheer
reluctance to yield.  Such men shoot their last cartridge before
surrendering, swim the last ounce of strength from their arms
before throwing them up to sink, search coolly until the latest
moment for a way from the burning building,--and sometimes come
face to face with miracles.

Thorpe's descriptions were contained in the battered little note-
book he had carried with him in the woods.  For each piece of land
first there came the township described by latitude and east-and-
west range.  After this generic description followed another figure
representing the section of that particular district.  So 49--17
W--8, meant section 8, of the township on range 49 north, 17 west.
If Thorpe wished to purchase the whole section, that description
would suffice.  On the other hand, if he wished to buy only one
forty, he described its position in the quarter-section.  Thus SW--
NW 49--17--8, meant the southwest forty of the northwest quarter of
section 8 in the township already described.

The clerk marked across each square of his map as Thorpe read them,
the date and the purchaser's name.

In his note-book Thorpe had, of course, entered the briefest
description possible.  Now, in dictating to the clerk, he conceived
the idea of specifying each subdivision.  This gained some time.
Instead of saying simply, "Northwest quarter of section 8," he made
of it four separate descriptions, as follows:--Northwest quarter of
northwest quarter; northeast of northwest quarter; southwest of
northwest quarter; and southeast of northwest quarter.

He was not so foolish as to read the descriptions in succession,
but so scattered them that the clerk, putting down the figures
mechanically, had no idea of the amount of unnecessary work he was
doing.  The minute hands of the clock dragged around.  Thorpe droned
down the long column.  The clerk scratched industriously, repeating
in a half voice each description as it was transcribed.

At length the task was finished.  It became necessary to type
duplicate lists of the descriptions.  While the somnolent youth
finished this task, Thorpe listened for the messenger boy on the
stairs.

A faint slam was heard outside the rickety old building.  Hasty
steps sounded along the corridor.  The landlooker merely stopped
the drumming of his fingers on the broad arm of the chair.  The
door flew open, and Wallace Carpenter walked quickly to him.

Thorpe's face lighted up as he rose to greet his partner.  The
boy had not forgotten their compact after all.

"Then it's all right?" queried the latter breathlessly.

"Sure," answered Thorpe heartily, "got 'em in good shape."

At the same time he was drawing the youth beyond the vigilant
watchfulness of Mr. Morrison.

"You're just in time," he said in an undertone.  "Never had so
close a squeak.  I suppose you have cash or a certified check:
that's all they'll take here."

"What do you mean?" asked Carpenter blankly.

"Haven't you that money?" returned Thorpe quick as a hawk.

"For Heaven's sake, isn't it here?" cried Wallace in consternation.
"I wired Duncan, my banker, here last night, and received a reply
from him.  He answered that he'd see to it.  Haven't you seen him?"

"No," repeated Thorpe in his turn.

"What can we do?"

"Can you get your check certified here near at hand?"

"Yes."

"Well, go do it.  And get a move on you.  You have precisely until
that boy there finishes clicking that machine.  Not a second longer."

"Can't you get them to wait a few minutes?"

"Wallace," said Thorpe, "do you see that white whiskered old lynx in
the corner?  That's Morrison, the man who wants to get our land.  If
I fail to plank down the cash the very instant it is demanded, he gets
his chance.  And he'll take it.  Now, go.  Don't hurry until you get
beyond the door: then FLY!"

Thorpe sat down again in his broad-armed chair and resumed his
drumming.  The nearest bank was six blocks away.  He counted over
in his mind the steps of Carpenter's progress; now to the door, now
in the next block, now so far beyond.  He had just escorted him to
the door of the bank, when the clerk's voice broke in on him.

"Now," Smithers was saying, "I'll give you a receipt for the
amount, and later will send to your address the title deeds of
the descriptions."

Carpenter had yet to find the proper official, to identify himself,
to certify the check, and to return.  It was hopeless.  Thorpe
dropped his hands in surrender.

Then he saw the boy lay the two typed lists before his principal,
and dimly he perceived that the youth, shamefacedly, was holding
something bulky toward himself.

"Wh--what is it?" he stammered, drawing his hand back as though from
a red-hot iron.

"You asked me for a telegram," said the boy stubbornly, as though
trying to excuse himself, "and I didn't just catch the name, anyway.
When I saw it on those lists I had to copy, I thought of this here."

"Where'd you get it?" asked Thorpe breathlessly.

"A fellow came here early and left it for you while I was sweeping
out," explained the boy.  "Said he had to catch a train.  It's yours
all right, ain't it?"

"Oh, yes," replied Thorpe.

He took the envelope and walked uncertainly to the tall window.  He
looked out at the chimneys.  After a moment he tore open the envelope.

"I hope there's no bad news, sir?" said the clerk, startled at the
paleness of the face Thorpe turned to the desk.

"No," replied the landlooker.  "Give me a receipt.  There's a
certified check for your money!"



Chapter XXIV


Now that the strain was over, Thorpe experienced a great weariness.
The long journey through the forest, his sleepless night on the
train, the mental alertness of playing the game with shrewd foes
all these stretched his fibers out one by one and left them limp.
He accepted stupidly the clerk's congratulations on his success,
left the name of the little hotel off Fort Street as the address
to which to send the deeds, and dragged himself off with infinite
fatigue to his bed-room.  There he fell at once into profound
unconsciousness.

He was awakened late in the afternoon by the sensation of a strong
pair of young arms around his shoulders, and the sound of Wallace
Carpenter's fresh voice crying in his ears:

"Wake up, wake up! you Indian!  You've been asleep all day, and I've
been waiting here all that time.  I want to hear about it.  Wake up,
I say!"

Thorpe rolled to a sitting posture on the edge of the bed, and
smiled uncertainly.  Then as the sleep drained from his brain,
he reached out his hand.

"You bet we did 'em, Wallace," said he, "but it looked like a hard
proposition for a while."

"How was it?  Tell me about it!" insisted the boy eagerly.  "You
don't know how impatient I've been.  The clerk at the Land Office
merely told me it was all right.  How did you fix it?"

While Thorpe washed and shaved and leisurely freshened himself, he
detailed his experiences of the last week.

"And," he concluded gravely, "there's only one man I know or ever
heard of to whom I would have considered it worth while even to
think of sending that telegram, and you are he.  Somehow I knew
you'd come to the scratch."

"It's the most exciting thing I ever heard of," sighed Wallace
drawing a full breath, "and I wasn't in it!  It's the sort of thing
I long for.  If I'd only waited another two weeks before coming
down!"

"In that case we couldn't have gotten hold of the money, remember,"
smiled Thorpe.

"That's so."  Wallace brightened.  "I did count, didn't I?"

"I thought so about ten o'clock this morning," Thorpe replied.

"Suppose you hadn't stumbled on their camp; suppose Injin Charley
hadn't seen them go up-river; suppose you hadn't struck that little
mill town JUST at the time you did!" marvelled Wallace.

"That's always the way," philosophized Thorpe in reply.  "It's the
old story of 'if the horse-shoe nail hadn't been lost,' you know.
But we got there; and that's the important thing."

"We did!" cried the boy, his enthusiasm rekindling, "and to-night
we'll celebrate with the best dinner we ran buy in town!"

Thorpe was tempted, but remembered the thirty dollars in his pocket,
and looked doubtful.

Carpenter possessed, as part of his volatile enthusiastic temperament,
keen intuitions.

"Don't refuse!" he begged.  "I've set my heart on giving my senior
partner a dinner.  Surely you won't refuse to be my guest here, as I
was yours in the woods!"

"Wallace," said Thorpe, "I'll go you.  I'd like to dine with you;
but moreover, I'll confess, I should like to eat a good dinner again.
It's been more than a year since I've seen a salad, or heard of
after-dinner coffee."

"Come on then," cried Wallace.

Together they sauntered through the lengthening shadows to a certain
small restaurant near Woodward Avenue, then much in vogue among
Detroit's epicures.  It contained only a half dozen tables, but was
spotlessly clean, and its cuisine was unrivalled.  A large fireplace
near the center of the room robbed it of half its restaurant air; and
a thick carpet on the floor took the rest.  The walls were decorated
in dark colors after the German style.  Several easy chairs grouped
before the fireplace, and a light wicker table heaped with magazines
and papers invited the guests to lounge while their orders were
being prepared.

Thorpe was not in the least Sybaritic in his tastes, but he could
not stifle a sigh of satisfaction at sinking so naturally into the
unobtrusive little comforts which the ornamental life offers to its
votaries.  They rose up around him and pillowed him, and were grateful
to the tired fibers of his being.  His remoter past had enjoyed these
things as a matter of course.  They had framed the background to his
daily habit.  Now that the background had again slid into place on
noiseless grooves, Thorpe for the first time became conscious that
his strenuous life had indeed been in the open air, and that the
winds of earnest endeavor, while bracing, had chilled.  Wallace
Carpenter, with the poet's insight and sympathy, saw and understood
this feeling.

"I want you to order this dinner," said he, handing over to Thorpe
the card which an impossibly correct waiter presented him.  "And I
want it a good one.  I want you to begin at the beginning and skip
nothing.  Pretend you are ordering just the dinner you would like
to offer your sister," he suggested on a sudden inspiration.  "I
assure you I'll try to be just as critical and exigent as she would
be."

Thorpe took up the card dreamily.

"There are no oysters and clams now," said he, "so we'll pass
right on to the soup.  It seems to me a desecration to pretend to
replace them.  We'll have a bisque," he told the waiter, "rich and
creamy.  Then planked whitefish, and have them just a light crisp,
brown.  You can bring some celery, too, if you have it fresh and
good.  And for entree tell your cook to make some macaroni au gratin,
but the inside must be soft and very creamy, and the outside very
crisp.  I know it's a queer dish for a formal dinner like ours," he
addressed Wallace with a little laugh, "but it's very, very good.
We'll have roast beef, rare and juicy;--if you bring it any way but
a cooked red, I'll send it back;--and potatoes roasted with the meat
and brown gravy.  Then the breast of chicken with the salad, in the
French fashion.  And I'll make the dressing.  We'll have an ice and
some fruit for dessert.  Black coffee."

"Yes, sir," replied the waiter, his pencil poised.  "And the wines?"

Thorpe ruminated sleepily.

"A rich red Burgundy," he decided, "for all the dinner.  If your
cellar contains a very good smooth Beaune, we'll have that."

"Yes, sir," answered the waiter, and departed.

Thorpe sat and gazed moodily into the wood fire, Wallace respected
his silence.  It was yet too early for the fashionable world, so the
two friends had the place to themselves.  Gradually the twilight
fell; strange shadows leaped and died on the wall.  A boy dressed
all in white turned on the lights.  By and by the waiter announced
that their repast awaited them.

Thorpe ate, his eyes half closed, in somnolent satisfaction.
Occasionally he smiled contentedly across at Wallace, who smiled
in response.  After the coffee he had the waiter bring cigars.
They went back between the tables to a little upholstered smoking
room, where they sank into the depths of leather chairs, and blew
the gray clouds of smoke towards the ceiling.  About nine o'clock
Thorpe spoke the first word.

"I'm stupid this evening, I'm afraid," said he, shaking himself.
"Don't think on that account I am not enjoying your dinner.  I
believe," he asserted earnestly, "that I never had such an altogether
comfortable, happy evening before in my life."

"I know," replied Wallace sympathetically.

"It seems just now," went on Thorpe, sinking more luxuriously into
his armchair, "that this alone is living--to exist in an environment
exquisitely toned; to eat, to drink, to smoke the best, not like a
gormand, but delicately as an artist would.  It is the flower of our
civilization."

Wallace remembered the turmoil of the wilderness brook; the little
birch knoll, yellow in the evening glow; the mellow voice of the
summer night crooning through the pines.  But he had the rare tact
to say nothing.

"Did it ever occur to you that what you needed, when sort of tired
out this way," he said abruptly after a moment, "is a woman to
understand and sympathize?  Wouldn't it have made this evening
perfect to have seen opposite you a being whom you loved, who
understood your moments of weariness, as well as your moments of
strength?"

"No," replied Thorpe, stretching his arms over his head, "a woman
would have talked.  It takes a friend and a man, to know when to
keep silent for three straight hours."

The waiter brought the bill on a tray, and Carpenter paid it.

"Wallace," said Thorpe suddenly after a long interval, "we'll
borrow enough by mortgaging our land to supply the working
expenses.  I suppose capital will have to investigate, and that'll
take time; but I can begin to pick up a crew and make arrangements
for transportation and supplies.  You can let me have a thousand
dollars on the new Company's note for initial expenses.  We'll
draw up articles of partnership to-morrow."



Chapter XXV


Next day the articles of partnership were drawn; and Carpenter gave
his note for the necessary expenses.  Then in answer to a pencilled
card which Mr. Morrison had evidently left at Thorpe's hotel in
person, both young men called at the lumberman's place of business.
They were ushered immediately into the private office.

Mr. Morrison was a smart little man with an ingratiating manner and
a fishy eye.  He greeted Thorpe with marked geniality.

"My opponent of yesterday!" he cried jocularly.  "Sit down, Mr.
Thorpe!
Although you did me out of some land I had made every preparation to
purchase, I can't but admire your grit and resourcefulness.  How did
you get here ahead of us?"

"I walked across the upper peninsula, and caught a boat," replied
Thorpe briefly.

"Indeed, INDEED!" replied Mr. Morrison, placing the tips of his
fingers together.  "Extraordinary! Well, Mr. Thorpe, you overreached
us nicely; and I suppose we must pay for our carelessness.  We must
have that pine, even though we pay stumpage on it.  Now what would
you consider a fair price for it?"

"It is not for sale," answered Thorpe.

"We'll waive all that.  Of course it is to your interest to make
difficulties and run the price up as high as you can.  But my time
is somewhat occupied just at present, so I would be very glad to
hear your top price--we will come to an agreement afterwards."

"You do not understand me, Mr. Morrison.  I told you the pine is
not for sale, and I mean it."

"But surely--What did you buy it for, then?" cried Mr. Morrison,
with evidences of a growing excitement.

"We intend to manufacture it."

Mr. Morrison's fishy eyes nearly popped out of his head.  He
controlled himself with an effort.

"Mr. Thorpe," said he, "let us try to be reasonable.  Our case
stands this way.  We have gone to a great deal of expense on
the Ossawinamakee in expectation of undertaking very extensive
operations there.  To that end we have cleared the stream, built
three dams, and have laid the foundations of a harbor and boom.
This has been very expensive.  Now your purchase includes most of
what we had meant to log.  You have, roughly speaking, about three
hundred millions in your holding, in addition to which there are
several millions scattering near it, which would pay nobody but
yourself to get in.  Our holdings are further up stream, and
comprise only about the equal of yours."

"Three hundred millions are not to be sneezed at," replied Thorpe.

"Certainly not," agreed Morrison, suavely, gaining confidence from
the sound of his own voice.  "Not in this country.  But you must
remember that a man goes into the northern peninsula only because
he can get something better there than here.  When the firm of
Morrison & Daly establishes itself now, it must be for the last
time.  We want enough timber to do us for the rest of the time we
are in business."

"In that case, you will have to hunt up another locality," replied
Thorpe calmly.

Morrison's eyes flashed.  But he retained his appearance of geniality,
and appealed to Wallace Carpenter.

"Then you will retain the advantage of our dams and improvements,"
said he.  "Is that fair?"

"No, not on the face of it," admitted Thorpe.  "But you did your
work in a navigable stream for private purposes, without the consent
of the Board of Control.  Your presence on the river is illegal.
You should have taken out a charter as an Improvement Company.  Then
as long as you 'tended to business and kept the concern in repair,
we'd have paid you a toll per thousand feet.  As soon as you let it
slide, however, the works would revert to the State.  I won't hinder
your doing that yet; although I might.  Take out your charter and
fix your rate of toll."

"In other words, you force us to stay there and run a little two-by-
four Improvement Company for your benefit, or else lose the value of
our improvements?"

"Suit yourself," answered Thorpe carelessly.  "You can always log
your present holdings."

"Very well," cried Morrison, so suddenly in a passion that Wallace
started back.  "It's war!  And let me tell you this, young man;
you're a new concern and we're an old one.  We'll crush you like
THAT!"  He crisped an envelope vindictively, and threw it in the
waste-basket.

"Crush ahead," replied Thorpe with great good humor.  "Good-day,
Mr. Morrison," and the two went out.

Wallace was sputtering and trembling with nervous excitement.  His
was one of those temperaments which require action to relieve the
stress of a stormy interview.  He was brave enough, but he would
always tremble in the presence of danger until the moment for
striking arrived.  He wanted to do something at once.

"Hadn't we better see a lawyer?" he asked.  "Oughtn't we to look
out that they don't take some of our pine?  Oughtn't we---"

"You just leave all that to me," replied Thorpe.  "The first thing
we want to do is to rustle some money."

"And you can leave THAT to ME," echoed Wallace.  "I know a little
of such things, and I have business connections who know more.  You
just get the camp running."

"I'll start for Bay City to-night," submitted Thorpe.  "There
ought to be a good lot of lumber-jacks lying around idle at this
time of year; and it's a good place to outfit from because we can
probably get freight rates direct by boat.  We'll be a little late
in starting, but we'll get in SOME logs this winter, anyway."






PART III


THE BLAZING OF THE TRAIL



Chapter XXVI


A lumbering town after the drive is a fearful thing.  Men just
off the river draw a deep breath, and plunge into the wildest
reactionary dissipation.  In droves they invade the cities,--wild,
picturesque, lawless.  As long as the money lasts, they blow it in.

"Hot money!" is the cry.  "She's burnt holes in all my pockets
already!"

The saloons are full, the gambling houses overflow, all the places
of amusement or crime run full blast.  A chip rests lightly on
everyone's shoulder.  Fights are as common as raspberries in August.
Often one of these formidable men, his muscles toughened and
quickened by the active, strenuous river work, will set out to "take
the town apart."  For a time he leaves rack and ruin, black eyes and
broken teeth behind him, until he meets a more redoubtable "knocker"
and is pounded and kicked into unconsciousness.  Organized gangs go
from house to house forcing the peaceful inmates to drink from their
bottles.  Others take possession of certain sections of the street
and resist "a l'outrance" the attempts of others to pass.  Inoffensive
citizens are stood on their heads, or shaken upside down until the
contents of their pockets rattle on the street.  Parenthetically,
these contents are invariably returned to their owners.  The
riverman's object is fun, not robbery.

And if rip-roaring, swashbuckling, drunken glory is what he is after,
he gets it.  The only trouble is, that a whole winter's hard work
goes in two or three weeks.  The only redeeming feature is, that he
is never, in or out of his cups, afraid of anything that walks the
earth.

A man comes out of the woods or off the drive with two or three
hundred dollars, which he is only too anxious to throw away by the
double handful.  It follows naturally that a crew of sharpers are
on hand to find out who gets it.  They are a hard lot.  Bold,
unprincipled men, they too are afraid of nothing; not even a
drunken lumber-jack, which is one of the dangerous wild animals
of the American fauna.  Their business is to relieve the man of
his money as soon as possible.  They are experts at their business.

The towns of Bay City and Saginaw alone in 1878 supported over
fourteen hundred tough characters.  Block after block was devoted
entirely to saloons.  In a radius of three hundred feet from the
famous old Catacombs could be numbered forty saloons, where drinks
were sold by from three to ten "pretty waiter girls."  When the
boys struck town, the proprietors and waitresses stood in their
doorways to welcome them.

"Why, Jack!" one would cry, "when did you drift in?  Tickled to
death to see you!  Come in an' have a drink.  That your chum?  Come
in, old man, and have a drink.  Never mind the pay; that's all right."

And after the first drink, Jack, of course, had to treat, and then
the chum.

Or if Jack resisted temptation and walked resolutely on, one of the
girls would remark audibly to another.

"He ain't no lumber-jack!  You can see that easy 'nuff!  He's jest
off th' hay-trail!"

Ten to one that brought him, for the woodsman is above all things
proud and jealous of his craft.

In the center of this whirlpool of iniquity stood the Catacombs as
the hub from which lesser spokes in the wheel radiated.  Any old
logger of the Saginaw Valley can tell you of the Catacombs, just
as any old logger of any other valley will tell you of the "Pen,"
the "White Row," the "Water Streets" of Alpena, Port Huron,
Ludington, Muskegon, and a dozen other lumber towns.

The Catacombs was a three-story building.  In the basement were
vile, ill-smelling, ill-lighted dens, small, isolated, dangerous.
The shanty boy with a small stake, far gone in drunkenness, there
tasted the last drop of wickedness, and thence was flung unconscious
and penniless on the streets.  A trap-door directly into the river
accommodated those who were inconsiderate enough to succumb under
rough treatment.

The second story was given over to drinking.  Polly Dickson there
reigned supreme, an anomaly.  She was as pretty and fresh and
pure-looking as a child; and at the same time was one of the most
ruthless and unscrupulous of the gang.  She could at will exercise
a fascination the more terrible in that it appealed at once to her
victim's nobler instincts of reverence, his capacity for what might
be called aesthetic fascination, as well as his passions.  When she
finally held him, she crushed him as calmly as she would a fly.

Four bars supplied the drinkables.  Dozens of "pretty waiter girls"
served the customers.  A force of professional fighters was maintained
by the establishment to preserve that degree of peace which should
look to the preservation of mirrors and glassware.

The third story contained a dance hall and a theater.  The character
of both would better be left to the imagination.

Night after night during the season, this den ran at top-steam.

By midnight, when the orgy was at its height, the windows brilliantly
illuminated, the various bursts of music, laughing, cursing, singing,
shouting, fighting, breaking in turn or all together from its open
windows, it was, as Jackson Hines once expressed it to me, like hell
let out for noon.

The respectable elements of the towns were powerless.  They could
not control the elections.  Their police would only have risked
total annihilation by attempting a raid.  At the first sign of
trouble they walked straightly in the paths of their own affairs,
awaiting the time soon to come when, his stake "blown-in," the
last bitter dregs of his pleasure gulped down, the shanty boy would
again start for the woods.



Chapter XXVII


Now in August, however, the first turmoil had died.  The "jam" had
boiled into town, "taken it apart," and left the inhabitants to
piece it together again as they could; the "rear" had not yet
arrived.  As a consequence, Thorpe found the city comparatively
quiet.

Here and there swaggered a strapping riverman, his small felt hat
cocked aggressively over one eye, its brim curled up behind; a
cigar stump protruding at an angle from beneath his sweeping
moustache; his hands thrust into the pockets of his trousers,
"stagged" off at the knee; the spikes of his river boots cutting
little triangular pieces from the wooden sidewalk.  His eye was
aggressively humorous, and the smile of his face was a challenge.

For in the last month he had faced almost certain death a dozen
times a day.  He had ridden logs down the rapids where a loss of
balance meant in one instant a ducking and in the next a blow on
the back from some following battering-ram; he had tugged and
strained and jerked with his peavey under a sheer wall of tangled
timber twenty feet high,--behind which pressed the full power of
the freshet,--only to jump with the agility of a cat from one bit
of unstable footing to another when the first sharp CRACK warned him
that he had done his work, and that the whole mass was about to
break down on him like a wave on the shore; he had worked fourteen
hours a day in ice-water, and had slept damp; he had pried at the
key log in the rollways on the bank until the whole pile had begun
to rattle down into the river like a cascade, and had jumped, or
ridden, or even dived out of danger at the last second.  In a
hundred passes he had juggled with death as a child plays with a
rubber balloon.  No wonder that he has brought to the town and his
vices a little of the lofty bearing of an heroic age.  No wonder
that he fears no man, since nature's most terrible forces of the
flood have hurled a thousand weapons at him in vain.  His muscles
have been hardened, his eye is quiet and sure, his courage is
undaunted, and his movements are as quick and accurate as a panther's.
Probably nowhere in the world is a more dangerous man of his hands
than the riverman.  He would rather fight than eat, especially when
he is drunk, as, like the cow-boy, he usually is when he gets into
town.  A history could be written of the feuds, the wars, the raids
instituted by one camp or one town against another.

The men would go in force sometimes to another city with the avowed
purpose of cleaning it out.  One battle I know of lasted nearly all
night.  Deadly weapons were almost never resorted to, unless indeed
a hundred and eighty pounds of muscle behind a fist hard as iron
might be considered a deadly weapon.  A man hard pressed by numbers
often resorted to a billiard cue, or an ax, or anything else that
happened to be handy, but that was an expedient called out by
necessity.  Knives or six-shooters implied a certain premeditation
which was discountenanced.

On the other hand, the code of fair fighting obtained hardly at
all.  The long spikes of river-boots made an admirable weapon in the
straight kick.  I have seen men whose faces were punctured as thickly
as though by small-pox, where the steel points had penetrated.  In a
free-for-all knock-down-and-drag-out, kicking, gouging, and biting
are all legitimate.  Anything to injure the other man, provided
always you do not knife him.  And when you take a half dozen of these
enduring, active, muscular, and fiery men, not one entertaining in
his innermost heart the faintest hesitation or fear, and set them at
each other with the lightning tirelessness of so many wild-cats, you
get as hard a fight as you could desire.  And they seem to like it.

One old fellow, a good deal of a character in his way, used to be
on the "drive" for a firm lumbering near Six Lakes.   He was
intensely loyal to his "Old Fellows," and every time he got a
little "budge" in him, he instituted a raid on the town owned by
a rival firm.  So frequent and so severe did these battles become
that finally the men were informed that another such expedition
would mean instant discharge.  The rule had its effect.  The raids
ceased.

But one day old Dan visited the saloon once too often.  He became
very warlike.  The other men merely laughed, for they were strong
enough themselves to recognize firmness in others, and it never
occurred to them that they could disobey so absolute a command.
So finally Dan started out quite alone.

He invaded the enemy's camp, attempted to clean out the saloon with
a billiard cue single handed, was knocked down, and would have been
kicked to death as he lay on the floor if he had not succeeded in
rolling under the billiard table where the men's boots could not
reach him.  As it was, his clothes were literally torn to ribbons,
one eye was blacked, his nose broken, one ear hung to its place by
a mere shred of skin, and his face and flesh were ripped and torn
everywhere by the "corks" on the boots.  Any but a riverman would
have qualified for the hospital.  Dan rolled to the other side of
the table, made a sudden break, and escaped.

But his fighting blood was not all spilled.  He raided the butcher-
shop, seized the big carving knife, and returned to the battle field.

The enemy decamped--rapidly--some of them through the window.  Dan
managed to get in but one blow.  He ripped the coat down the man's
back as neatly as though it had been done with shears, one clean
straight cut from collar to bottom seam.  A quarter of an inch
nearer would have split the fellow's backbone.  As it was, he
escaped without even a scratch.

Dan commandeered two bottles of whisky, and, gory and wounded as he
was, took up the six-mile tramp home, bearing the knife over his
shoulder as a banner of triumph.

Next morning, weak from the combined effects of war and whisky, he
reported to headquarters.

"What is it, Dan?" asked the Old Fellow without turning.

"I come to get my time," replied the riverman humbly.

"What for?" inquired the lumberman.

"I have been over to Howard City," confessed Dan.

The owner turned and looked him over.

"They sort of got ahead of me a little," explained Dan sheepishly.

The lumberman took stock of the old man's cuts and bruises, and
turned away to hide a smile.

"I guess I'll let you off this trip," said he.  "Go to work--when
you can.  I don't believe you'll go back there again."

"No, sir," replied Dan humbly."

And so the life of alternate work and pleasure, both full of personal
danger, develops in time a class of men whose like is be found only
among the cowboys, scouts, trappers, and Indian fighters of our other
frontiers.  The moralists will always hold up the hands of horror at
such types; the philosopher will admire them as the last incarnation
of the heroic age, when the man is bigger than his work.  Soon the
factories, the machines, the mechanical structures and constructions,
the various branches of co-operation will produce quasi-automatically
institutions evidently more important than the genius or force of
any one human being.  The personal element will have become nearly
eliminated.  In the woods and on the frontier still are many whose
powers are greater than their works; whose fame is greater than their
deeds.  They are men, powerful, virile, even brutal at times; but
magnificent with the strength of courage and resource.

All this may seem a digression from the thread of our tale, but as
a matter of fact it is necessary that you understand the conditions
of the time and place in which Harry Thorpe had set himself the duty
of success.

He had seen too much of incompetent labor to be satisfied with
anything but the best.  Although his ideas were not as yet
formulated, he hoped to be able to pick up a crew of first-class
men from those who had come down with the advance, or "jam," of the
spring's drive.  They should have finished their orgies by now, and,
empty of pocket, should be found hanging about the boarding-houses
and the quieter saloons.  Thorpe intended to offer good wages for
good men.  He would not need more than twenty at first, for during
the approaching winter he purposed to log on a very small scale
indeed.  The time for expansion would come later.

With this object in view he set out from his hotel about half-past
seven on the day of his arrival, to cruise about in the lumber-jack
district already described.  The hotel clerk had obligingly given him
the names of a number of the quieter saloons, where the boys "hung
out" between bursts of prosperity.  In the first of these Thorpe was
helped materially in his vague and uncertain quest by encountering
an old acquaintance.

From the sidewalk he heard the vigorous sounds of a one-sided
altercation punctuated by frequent bursts of quickly silenced
laughter.  Evidently some one was very angry, and the rest amused.
After a moment Thorpe imagined he recognized the excited voice.  So
he pushed open the swinging screen door and entered.

The place was typical.  Across one side ran the hard-wood bar with
foot-rest and little towels hung in metal clasps under its edge.
Behind it was a long mirror, a symmetrical pile of glasses, a
number of plain or ornamental bottles, and a miniature keg or so of
porcelain containing the finer whiskys and brandies.  The bar-keeper
drew beer from two pumps immediately in front of him, and rinsed
glasses in some sort of a sink under the edge of the bar.  The
center of the room was occupied by a tremendous stove capable of
burning whole logs of cordwood.  A stovepipe led from the stove here
and there in wire suspension to a final exit near the other corner.
On the wall were two sporting chromos, and a good variety of
lithographed calendars and illuminated tin signs advertising beers
and spirits.  The floor was liberally sprinkled with damp sawdust,
and was occupied, besides the stove, by a number of wooden chairs
and a single round table.

The latter, a clumsy heavy affair beyond the strength of an ordinary
man, was being deftly interposed between himself and the attacks of
the possessor of the angry voice by a gigantic young riverman in the
conventional stagged (i.e., chopped off) trousers, "cork" shoes, and
broad belt typical of his craft.  In the aggressor Thorpe recognized
old Jackson Hines.

"Damn you!" cried the old man, qualifying the oath, "let me get at
you, you great big sock-stealer, I'll make you hop high!  I'll snatch
you bald-headed so quick that you'll think you never had any hair!"

"I'll settle with you in the morning, Jackson," laughed the riverman.

"You want to eat a good breakfast, then, because you won't have no
appetite for dinner."

The men roared, with encouraging calls.  The riverman put on a
ludicrous appearance of offended dignity.

"Oh, you needn't swell up like a poisoned pup!" cried old Jackson
plaintively, ceasing his attacks from sheer weariness.  "You know
you're as safe as a cow tied to a brick wall behind that table."

Thorpe seized the opportunity to approach.

"Hello, Jackson," said he.

The old man peered at him out of the blur of his excitement.

"Don't you know me?" inquired Thorpe.

"Them lamps gives 'bout as much light as a piece of chalk,"
complained Jackson testily.  "Knows you?  You bet I do! How are
you, Harry?  Where you been keepin' yourself?  You look 'bout as
fat as a stall-fed knittin' needle."

"I've been landlooking in the upper peninsula," explained Thorpe,
"on the Ossawinamakee, up in the Marquette country."

"Sho'" commented Jackson in wonder, "way up there where the moon
changes!"

"It's a fine country," went on Thorpe so everyone could hear, "with
a great cutting of white pine.  It runs as high as twelve hundred
thousand to the forty sometimes."

"Trees clean an' free of limbs?" asked Jackson.

"They're as good as the stuff over on seventeen; you remember that."

"Clean as a baby's leg," agreed Jackson.

"Have a glass of beer?" asked Thorpe.

"Dry as a tobacco box," confessed Hines.

"Have something, the rest of you?" invited Thorpe.

So they all drank.

On a sudden inspiration Thorpe resolved to ask the old man's advice
as to crew and horses.  It might not be good for much, but it would
do no harm.

Jackson listened attentively to the other's brief recital.

"Why don't you see Tim Shearer?  He ain't doin' nothin' since the
jam came down," was his comment.

"Isn't he with the M. & D. people?" asked Thorpe.

"Nope.  Quit."

"How's that?"

"'Count of Morrison.  Morrison he comes up to run things some.  He
does.  Tim he's getting the drive in shape, and he don't want to be
bothered, but old Morrison he's as busy as hell beatin' tan-bark.
Finally Tim, he calls him.  "'Look here, Mr. Morrison,' says he,
'I'm runnin' this drive.  If I don't get her there, all right; you
can give me my time.  'Till then you ain't got nothin' to say.'

"Well, that makes the Old Fellow as sore as a scalded pup.  He's
used to bossin' clerks and such things, and don't have much of an
idea of lumber-jacks.  He has big ideas of respect, so he 'calls'
Tim dignified like.

"Tim didn't hit him; but I guess he felt like th' man who met the
bear without any weapon,--even a newspaper would 'a' come handy.  He
hands in his time t' once and quits.  Sence then he's been as mad as
a bar-keep with a lead quarter, which ain't usual for Tim.  He's been
filin' his teeth for M. & D. right along.  Somethin's behind it all,
I reckon."

"Where'll I find him?" asked Thorpe.

Jackson gave the name of a small boarding-house.  Shortly after,
Thorpe left him to amuse the others with his unique conversation,
and hunted up Shearer's stopping-place.



Chapter XXVIII


The boarding-house proved to be of the typical lumber-jack class, a
narrow "stoop," a hall-way and stairs in the center, and an office
and bar on either side.  Shearer and a half dozen other men about
his own age sat, their chairs on two legs and their "cork" boots on
the rounds of the chairs, smoking placidly in the tepid evening air.
The light came from inside the building, so that while Thorpe was
in plain view, he could not make out which of the dark figures on
the piazza was the man he wanted.  He approached, and attempted an
identifying scrutiny.  The men, with the taciturnity of their class
in the presence of a stranger, said nothing.

"Well, bub," finally drawled a voice from the corner, "blowed that
stake you made out of Radway, yet?"

"That you, Shearer?" inquired Thorpe advancing.  "You're the man I'm
looking for."

"You've found me," replied the old man dryly.

Thorpe was requested elaborately to "shake hands" with the owners
of six names.  Then he had a chance to intimate quietly to Shearer
that he wanted a word with him alone.  The riverman rose silently
and led the way up the straight, uncarpeted stairs, along a narrow,
uncarpeted hall, to a square, uncarpeted bedroom.  The walls and
ceiling of this apartment were of unpainted planed pine.  It
contained a cheap bureau, one chair, and a bed and washstand to
match the bureau.  Shearer lit the lamp and sat on the bed.

"What is it?" he asked.

"I have a little pine up in the northern peninsula within walking
distance of Marquette," said Thorpe, "and I want to get a crew of
about twenty men.  It occurred to me that you might be willing to
help me."

The riverman frowned steadily at his interlocutor from under his
bushy brows.

"How much pine you got?" he asked finally.

"About three hundred millions," replied Thorpe quietly.

The old man's blue eyes fixed themselves with unwavering steadiness
on Thorpe's face.

"You're jobbing some of it, eh?" he submitted finally as the only
probable conclusion.  "Do you think you know enough about it?  Who
does it belong to?"

"It belongs to a man named Carpenter and myself."

The riverman pondered this slowly for an appreciable interval, and
then shot out another question.

"How'd you get it?"

Thorpe told him simply, omitting nothing except the name of the firm
up-river.  When he had finished, Shearer evinced no astonishment nor
approval.

"You done well," he commented finally.  Then after another interval:

"Have you found out who was the men stealin' the pine?"

"Yes," replied Thorpe quietly, "it was Morrison & Daly."

The old man flickered not an eyelid.  He slowly filled his pipe and
lit it.

"I'll get you a crew of men," said he, "if you'll take me as foreman."

"But it's a little job at first," protested Thorpe.  "I only want
a camp of twenty.  It wouldn't be worth your while."

"That's my look-out.  I'll take th' job," replied the logger grimly.
"You got three hundred million there, ain't you?  And you're goin'
to cut it?  It ain't such a small job."

Thorpe could hardly believe his good-fortune in having gained so
important a recruit.  With a practical man as foreman, his mind
would be relieved of a great deal of worry over unfamiliar detail.
He saw at once that he would himself be able to perform all the
duties of scaler, keep in touch with the needs of the camp, and
supervise the campaign.  Nevertheless he answered the older man's
glance with one as keen, and said:

"Look here, Shearer, if you take this job, we may as well understand
each other at the start.  This is going to be my camp, and I'm going
to be boss.  I don't know much about logging, and I shall want you
to take charge of all that, but I shall want to know just why you do
each thing, and if my judgment advises otherwise, my judgment goes.
If I want to discharge a man, he WALKS without any question.  I know
about what I shall expect of each man; and I intend to get it out of
him.  And in questions of policy mine is the say-so every trip.  Now
I know you're a good man, one of the best there is,and I presume I
shall find your judgment the best, but I don't want any mistakes to
start with.  If you want to be my foreman on those terms, just say
so, and I'll be tickled to death to have you."

For the first time the lumberman's face lost, during a single
instant, its mask of immobility.  His steel-blue eyes flashed, his
mouth twitched with some strong emotion.  For the first time, too,
he spoke without his contemplative pause of preparation.

"That's th' way to talk!" he cried.  "Go with you?  Well I should
rise to remark!  You're the boss; and I always said it.  I'll get
you a gang of bully boys that will roll logs till there's skating
in hell!"

Thorpe left, after making an appointment at his own hotel for the
following day, more than pleased with his luck.  Although he had by
now fairly good and practical ideas in regard to the logging of a
bunch of pine, he felt himself to be very deficient in the details.
In fact, he anticipated his next step with shaky confidence.  He
would now be called upon to buy four or five teams of horses, and
enough feed to last them the entire winter; he would have to arrange
for provisions in abundance and variety for his men; he would have to
figure on blankets, harness, cook-camp utensils, stoves, blacksmith
tools, iron, axes, chains, cant-hooks, van-goods, pails, lamps, oil,
matches, all sorts of hardware,--in short, all the thousand and one
things, from needles to court-plaster, of which a self-sufficing
community might come in need.  And he would have to figure out his
requirements for the entire winter.  After navigation closed, he
could import nothing more.

How could he know what to buy,--how many barrels of flour, how much
coffee, raisins, baking powder, soda, pork, beans, dried apples,
sugar, nutmeg, pepper, salt, crackers, molasses, ginger, lard, tea,
corned beef, catsup, mustard,--to last twenty men five or six months?
How could he be expected to think of each item of a list of two
hundred, the lack of which meant measureless bother, and the
desirability of which suggested itself only when the necessity
arose?  It is easy, when the mind is occupied with multitudinous
detail, to forget simple things, like brooms or iron shovels.  With
Tim Shearer to help his inexperience, he felt easy.  He knew he
could attend to advantageous buying, and to making arrangements
with the steamship line to Marquette for the landing of his goods
at the mouth of the Ossawinamakee.

Deep in these thoughts, he wandered on at random.  He suddenly came
to himself in the toughest quarter of Bay City.

Through the summer night shrilled the sound of cachinations painted
to the colors of mirth.  A cheap piano rattled and thumped through
an open window.  Men's and women's voices mingled in rising and
falling gradations of harshness.  Lights streamed irregularly across
the dark.

Thorpe became aware of a figure crouched in the door-way almost at
his feet.  The sill lay in shadow so the bulk was lost, but the
flickering rays of a distant street lamp threw into relief the
high-lights of a violin, and a head.  The face upturned to him was
thin and white and wolfish under a broad white brow.  Dark eyes
gleamed at him with the expression of a fierce animal.  Across the
forehead ran a long but shallow cut from which blood dripped.  The
creature clasped both arms around a violin.  He crouched there and
stared up at Thorpe, who stared down at him.

"What's the matter?" asked the latter finally.

The creature made no reply, but drew his arms closer about his
instrument, and blinked his wolf eyes.

Moved by some strange, half-tolerant whim of compassion, Thorpe
made a sign to the unknown to rise.

"Come with me," said he, "and I'll have your forehead attended to."

The wolf eyes gleamed into his with a sudden savage concentration.
Then their owner obediently arose.

Thorpe now saw that the body before him was of a cripple, short-
legged, hunch-backed, long-armed, pigeon-breasted.  The large
head sat strangely top-heavy between even the broad shoulders.
It confirmed the hopeless but sullen despair that brooded on the
white countenance.

At the hotel Thorpe, examining the cut, found it more serious in
appearance than in reality.  With a few pieces of sticking plaster
he drew its edges together.

Then he attempted to interrogate his find.

"What is your name?" he asked.

"Phil."

"Phil what?"

Silence.

"How did you get hurt?"

No reply.

"Were you playing your fiddle in one of those houses?"

The cripple nodded slowly.

"Are you hungry?" asked Thorpe, with a sudden thoughtfulness.

"Yes," replied the cripple, with a lightning gleam in his wolf eyes.

Thorpe rang the bell.  To the boy who answered it he said:

"Bring me half a dozen beef sandwiches and a glass of milk, and be
quick about it."

"Do you play the fiddle much?" continued Thorpe.

The cripple nodded again.

"Let's hear what you can do."

"They cut my strings!" cried Phil with a passionate wail.

The cry came from the heart, and Thorpe was touched by it.  The price
of strings was evidently a big sum.

"I'll get you more in the morning," said he.  "Would you like to
leave Bay City?"

"Yes" cried the boy with passion.

"You would have to work.  You would have to be chore-boy in a lumber
camp, and play fiddle for the men when they wanted you to."

"I'll do it," said the cripple.

"Are you sure you could?  You will have to split all the wood for
the men, the cook, and the office; you will have to draw the water,
and fill the lamps, and keep the camps clean.  You will be paid for
it, but it is quite a job.  And you would have to do it well.  If
you did not do it well, I would discharge you."

"I will do it!" repeated the cripple with a shade more earnestness.

"All right, then I'll take you," replied Thorpe.

The cripple said nothing, nor moved a muscle of his face, but the
gleam of the wolf faded to give place to the soft, affectionate glow
seen in the eyes of a setter dog.  Thorpe was startled at the change.

A knock announced the sandwiches and milk.  The cripple fell upon
them with both hands in a sudden ecstacy of hunger.  When he had
finished, he looked again at Thorpe, and this time there were tears
in his eyes.

A little later Thorpe interviewed the proprietor of the hotel.

"I wish you'd give this boy a good cheap room and charge his keep
to me," said he.  "He's going north with me."

Phil was led away by the irreverent porter, hugging tightly his
unstrung violin to his bosom.

Thorpe lay awake for some time after retiring.  Phil claimed a
share of his thoughts.

Thorpe's winter in the woods had impressed upon him that a good
cook and a fiddler will do more to keep men contented than high
wages and easy work.  So his protection of the cripple was not
entirely disinterested.  But his imagination persisted in occupying
itself with the boy.  What terrible life of want and vicious
associates had he led in this terrible town?  What treatment could
have lit that wolf-gleam in his eyes?  What hell had he inhabited
that he was so eager to get away?  In an hour or so he dozed.  He
dreamed that the cripple had grown to enormous proportions and was
overshadowing his life.  A slight noise outside his bed-room door
brought him to his feet.

He opened the door and found that in the stillness of the night the
poor deformed creature had taken the blankets from his bed and had
spread them across the door-sill of the man who had befriended him.



Chapter XXIX


Three weeks later the steam barge Pole Star sailed down the reach
of Saginaw Bay.

Thorpe had received letters from Carpenter advising him of a credit
to him at a Marquette bank, and inclosing a draft sufficient for
current expenses.  Tim Shearer had helped make out the list of
necessaries.  In time everything was loaded, the gang-plank hauled
in, and the little band of Argonauts set their faces toward the
point where the Big Dipper swings.

The weather was beautiful.  Each morning the sun rose out of the
frosty blue lake water, and set in a sea of deep purple.  The moon,
once again at the full, drew broad paths across the pathless waste.
From the southeast blew daily the lake trades, to die at sunset,
and then to return in the soft still nights from the west.  A more
propitious beginning for the adventure could not be imagined.

The ten horses in the hold munched their hay and oats as peaceably
as though at home in their own stables.  Jackson Hines had helped
select them from the stock of firms changing locality or going out
of business.  His judgment in such matters was infallible, but he
had resolutely refused to take the position of barn-boss which
Thorpe offered him.

"No," said he, "she's too far north.  I'm gettin' old, and the
rheumatics ain't what you might call abandonin' of me.  Up there
it's colder than hell on a stoker's holiday."

So Shearer had picked out a barn-boss of his own.  This man was
important, for the horses are the mainstay of logging operations.
He had selected also, a blacksmith, a cook, four teamsters, half
a dozen cant-hook men, and as many handy with ax or saw.

"The blacksmith is also a good wood-butcher (carpenter)," explained
Shearer.  "Four teams is all we ought to keep going at a clip.  If
we need a few axmen, we can pick 'em up at Marquette.  I think this
gang'll stick.  I picked 'em."

There was not a young man in the lot.  They were most of them in the
prime of middle life, between thirty and forty, rugged in appearance,
"cocky" in manner, with the swagger and the oath of so many
buccaneers,
hard as nails.  Altogether Thorpe thought them about as rough a set
of customers as he had ever seen.  Throughout the day they played
cards on deck, and spat tobacco juice abroad, and swore incessantly.
Toward himself and Shearer their manner was an odd mixture of
independent equality and a slight deference.  It was as much as
to say, "You're the boss, but I'm as good a man as you any day."
They would be a rough, turbulent, unruly mob to handle, but under
a strong man they might accomplish wonders.

Constituting the elite of the profession, as it were,--whose swagger
every lad new to the woods and river tried to emulate, to whom
lesser lights looked up as heroes and models, and whose lofty, half-
contemptuous scorn of everything and everybody outside their circle
of "bully boys" was truly the aristocracy of class,--Thorpe might
have wondered at their consenting to work for an obscure little camp
belonging to a greenhorn.  Loyalty to and pride in the firm for
which he works is a strong characteristic of the lumber-jack.  He
will fight at the drop of a hat on behalf of his "Old Fellows"; brag
loud and long of the season's cut, the big loads, the smart methods
of his camps; and even after he has been discharged for some flagrant
debauch, he cherishes no rancor, but speaks with a soft reminiscence
to the end of his days concerning "that winter in '8I when the Old
Fellows put in sixty million on Flat River."

For this reason he feels that he owes it to his reputation to ally
himself only with firms of creditable size and efficiency.  The small
camps are for the youngsters.  Occasionally you will see two or three
of the veterans in such a camp, but it is generally a case of lacking
something better.

The truth is, Shearer had managed to inspire in the minds of his
cronies an idea that they were about to participate in a fight.  He
re-told Thorpe's story artistically, shading the yellows and the
reds.  He detailed the situation as it existed.  The men agreed that
the "young fellow had sand enough for a lake front."  After that
there needed but a little skillful maneuvering to inspire them with
the idea that it would be a great thing to take a hand, to "make a
camp" in spite of the big concern up-river.

Shearer knew that this attitude was tentative.  Everything depended
on how well Thorpe lived up to his reputation at the outset,--how
good a first impression of force and virility he would manage to
convey,--for the first impression possessed the power of transmuting
the present rather ill-defined enthusiasm into loyalty or
dissatisfaction.  But Tim himself believed in Thorpe blindly.  So he
had no fears.

A little incident at the beginning of the voyage did much to reassure
him.  It was on the old question of whisky.

Thorpe had given orders that no whisky was to be brought aboard,
as he intended to tolerate no high-sea orgies.  Soon after leaving
dock he saw one of the teamsters drinking from a pint flask.  Without
a word he stepped briskly forward, snatched the bottle from the man's
lips, and threw it overboard.  Then he turned sharp on his heel and
walked away, without troubling himself as to how the fellow was going
to take it.

The occurrence pleased the men, for it showed them they had made no
mistake.  But it meant little else.  The chief danger really was
lest they become too settled in the protective attitude.  As they
took it, they were about, good-naturedly, to help along a worthy
greenhorn.  This they considered exceedingly generous on their part,
and in their own minds they were inclined to look on Thorpe much as
a grown man would look on a child.  There needed an occasion for him
to prove himself bigger than they.

Fine weather followed them up the long blue reach of Lake Huron;
into the noble breadth of the Detour Passage, past the opening
through the Thousand Islands of the Georgian Bay; into the St.
Mary's River.  They were locked through after some delay on
account of the grain barges from Duluth, and at last turned their
prow westward in the Big Sea Water, beyond which lay Hiawatha's
Po-ne-mah, the Land of the Hereafter.

Thorpe was about late that night, drinking in the mystic beauty of
the scene.  Northern lights, pale and dim, stretched their arc
across beneath the Dipper.  The air, soft as the dead leaves of
spring, fanned his cheek.  By and by the moon, like a red fire
at sea, lifted itself from the waves.  Thorpe made his way to the
stern, beyond the square deck house, where he intended to lean on
the rail in silent contemplation of the moon-path.

He found another before him.  Phil, the little cripple, was peering
into the wonderful east, its light in his eyes.  He did not look at
Thorpe when the latter approached, but seemed aware of his presence,
for he moved swiftly to give room.

"It is very beautiful; isn't it, Phil?" said Thorpe after a moment.

"It is the Heart Song of the Sea," replied the cripple in a hushed
voice.

Thorpe looked down surprised.

"Who told you that?" he asked.

But the cripple, repeating the words of a chance preacher, could
explain himself no farther.  In a dim way the ready-made phrase had
expressed the smothered poetic craving of his heart,--the belief
that the sea, the sky, the woods, the men and women, you, I, all
have our Heart Songs, the Song which is most beautiful.

"The Heart Song of the Sea," he repeated gropingly.  "I don't know
. . .I play it," and he made the motion of drawing a bow across
strings, "very still and low."  And this was all Thorpe's question
could elicit.

Thorpe fell silent in the spell of the night, and pondered over
the chances of life which had cast on the shores of the deep as
driftwood the soul of a poet.

"Your Song," said the cripple timidly, "some day I will hear it.
Not yet.  That night in Bay City, when you took me in, I heard it
very dim.  But I cannot play it yet on my violin."

"Has your violin a song of its own?" queried the man.

"I cannot hear it.  It tries to sing, but there is something in the
way.  I cannot.  Some day I will hear it and play it, but--" and he
drew nearer Thorpe and touched his arm--"that day will be very bad
for me.  I lose something."  His eyes of the wistful dog were big
and wondering.

"Queer little Phil!" cried Thorpe laughing whimsically.  "Who tells
you these things?"

"Nobody," said the cripple dreamily, "they come when it is like to-
night.  In Bay City they do not come."

At this moment a third voice broke in on them.

"Oh, it's you, Mr. Thorpe," said the captain of the vessel.  "Thought
it was some of them lumber-jacks, and I was going to fire 'em below.
Fine night."

"It is that," answered Thorpe, again the cold, unresponsive man of
reticence.  "When do you expect to get in, Captain?"

"About to-morrow noon," replied the captain, moving away.  Thorpe
followed him a short distance, discussing the landing.  The cripple
stood all night, his bright, luminous eyes gazing clear and unwinking
at the moonlight, listening to his Heart Song of the Sea.



Chapter XXX


Next morning continued the traditions of its calm predecessors.
Therefore by daybreak every man was at work.  The hatches were
opened, and soon between-decks was cumbered with boxes, packing
cases, barrels, and crates.  In their improvised stalls, the patient
horses seemed to catch a hint of shore-going and whinnied.  By ten
o'clock there loomed against the strange coast line of the Pictured
Rocks, a shallow bay and what looked to be a dock distorted by the
northern mirage.

"That's her," said the captain.

Two hours later the steamboat swept a wide curve, slid between the
yellow waters of two outlying reefs, and, with slackened speed,
moved slowly toward the wharf of log cribs filled with stone.

The bay or the dock Thorpe had never seen.  He took them on the
captain's say-so.  He knew very well that the structure had been
erected by and belonged to Morrison & Daly, but the young man had
had the foresight to purchase the land lying on the deep water side
of the bay.  He therefore anticipated no trouble in unloading; for
while Morrison & Daly owned the pier itself, the land on which it
abutted belonged to him.

From the arms of the bay he could make out a dozen figures standing
near the end of the wharf.  When, with propeller reversed, the Pole
Star bore slowly down towards her moorings, Thorpe recognized Dyer
at the head of eight or ten woodsmen.  The sight of Radway's old
scaler somehow filled him with a quiet but dangerous anger, especially
since that official, on whom rested a portion at least of the
responsibility of the jobber's failure, was now found in the employ
of the very company which had attempted that failure.  It looked
suspicious.

"Catch this line!" sung out the mate, hurling the coil of a handline
on the wharf.

No one moved, and the little rope, after a moment, slid overboard
with a splash.

The captain, with a curse, signalled full speed astern.

"Captain Morse!" cried Dyer, stepping forward.  "My orders are that
you are to land here nothing but M. & D. merchandise."

"I have a right to land," answered Thorpe.  "The shore belongs to
me."

"This dock doesn't," retorted the other sharply, "and you can't
set foot on her."

"You have no legal status.  You had no business building in the
first place---" began Thorpe, and then stopped with a choke of
anger at the futility of arguing legality in such a case.

The men had gathered interestedly in the waist of the ship, cool,
impartial, severely critical.  The vessel, gathering speed astern,
but not yet obeying her reversed helm, swung her bow in towards the
dock.  Thorpe ran swiftly forward, and during the instant of rubbing
contact, leaped.

He alighted squarely upon his feet.  Without an instant's hesitation,
hot with angry energy at finding his enemy within reach of his hand,
he rushed on Dyer, and with one full, clean in-blow stretched him
stunned on the dock.  For a moment there was a pause of astonishment.
Then the woodsmen closed upon him.

During that instant Thorpe had become possessed of a weapon  It came
hurling through the air from above to fall at his feet.  Shearer,
with the cool calculation of the pioneer whom no excitement can
distract from the main issue, had seen that it would be impossible
to follow his chief, and so had done the next best thing,--thrown
him a heavy iron belaying pin.

Thorpe was active, alert, and strong.  The men could come at him
only in front.  As offset, he could not give ground, even for one
step.  Still, in the hands of a powerful man, the belaying pin is by
no means a despicable weapon.  Thorpe hit with all his strength and
quickness.  He was conscious once of being on the point of defeat.
Then he had cleared a little space for himself.  Then the men were
on him again more savagely than ever.  One fellow even succeeded in
hitting him a glancing blow on the shoulder.

Then came a sudden crash.  Thorpe was nearly thrown from his feet.
The next instant a score of yelling men leaped behind and all
around him.  There ensued a moment's scuffle, the sound of dull
blows; and the dock was clear of all but Dyer and three others
who were, like himself, unconscious.  The captain, yielding to
the excitement, had run his prow plump against the wharf.

Some of the crew received the mooring lines.  All was ready for
disembarkation.

Bryan Moloney, a strapping Irish-American of the big-boned, red-
cheeked type, threw some water over the four stunned combatants.
Slowly they came to life.  They were promptly yanked to their feet
by the irate rivermen, who commenced at once to bestow sundry
vigorous kicks and shakings by way of punishment.  Thorpe interposed.

"Quit it!" he commanded.  "Let them go!"

The men grumbled.  One or two were inclined to be openly rebellious.

"If I hear another peep out of you," said Thorpe to these latter,
"you can climb right aboard and take the return trip."  He looked
them in the eye until they muttered, and then went on: "Now, we've
got to get unloaded and our goods ashore before those fellows report
to camp.  Get right moving, and hustle!"

If the men expected any comment, approval, or familiarity from their
leader on account of their little fracas, they were disappointed.
This was a good thing.  The lumber-jack demands in his boss a
certain fundamental unapproachability, whatever surface bonhomie
he may evince.

So Dyer and his men picked themselves out of the trouble sullenly
and departed.  The ex-scaler had nothing to say as long as he was
within reach, but when he had gained the shore, he turned.

"You won't think this is so funny when you get in the law-courts!"
he shouted.

Thorpe made no reply.  "I guess we'll keep even," he muttered.

"By the jumping Moses," snarled Scotty Parsons turning in threat.

"Scotty!" said Thorpe sharply.

Scotty turned back to his task, which was to help the blacksmith
put together the wagon, the component parts of which the others had
trundled out.

With thirty men at the job it does not take a great while to move
a small cargo thirty or forty feet.  By three o'clock the Pole Star
was ready to continue her journey.  Thorpe climbed aboard, leaving
Shearer in charge.

Keep the men at it, Tim," said he.  "Put up the walls of the warehouse
good and strong, and move the stuff in.  If it rains, you can spread
the tent over the roof, and camp in with the provisions.  If you get
through before I return, you might take a scout up the river and fix
on a camp site.  I'll bring back the lumber for roofs, floors, and
trimmings with me, and will try to pick up a few axmen for swamping.
Above all things, have a good man or so always in charge.  Those
fellows won't bother us any more for the present, I think; but it
pays to be on deck.  So long."

In Marquette, Thorpe arranged for the cashing of his time checks
and orders; bought lumber at the mills; talked contract with old
Harvey, the mill-owner and prospective buyer of the young man's
cut; and engaged four axmen whom he found loafing about, waiting
for the season to open.

When he returned to the bay he found the warehouse complete except
for the roofs and gables.  These, with their reinforcement of tar-
paper, were nailed on in short order.  Shearer and Andrews, the
surveyor, were scouting up the river.

"No trouble from above, boys?" asked Thorpe.

"Nary trouble," they replied.

The warehouse was secured by padlocks, the wagon loaded with the
tent and the necessaries of life and work.  Early in the morning
the little procession laughing, joking, skylarking with the high
spirits of men in the woods took its way up the river-trail.  Late
that evening, tired, but still inclined to mischief, they came to
the first dam, where Shearer and Andrews met them.

"How do you like it, Tim?" asked Thorpe that evening.

"She's all right," replied the riverman with emphasis; which, for
him, was putting it strong.

At noon of the following day the party arrived at the second dam.
Here Shearer had decided to build the permanent camp.  Injin Charley
was constructing one of his endless series of birch-bark canoes.
Later he would paddle the whole string to Marquette, where he would
sell them to a hardware dealer for two dollars and a half apiece.

To Thorpe, who had walked on ahead with his foreman, it seemed that
he had never been away.  There was the knoll; the rude camp with the
deer hides; the venison hanging suspended from the pole; the endless
broil and tumult of the clear north-country stream; the yellow glow
over the hill opposite.  Yet he had gone a nearly penniless
adventurer;
he returned at the head of an enterprise.

Injin Charley looked up and grunted as Thorpe approached.

"How are you, Charley?" greeted Thorpe reticently.

"You gettum pine?  Good!" replied Charley in the same tone.

That was all; for strong men never talk freely of what is in their
hearts.  There is no need; they understand.



Chapter XXXI


Two months passed away.  Winter set in.  The camp was built and
inhabited.  Routine had established itself, and all was going well.

The first move of the M. & D. Company had been one of conciliation.
Thorpe was approached by the walking-boss of the camps up-river.  The
man made no reference to or excuse for what had occurred, nor did he
pretend to any hypocritical friendship for the younger firm.  His
proposition was entirely one of mutual advantage.  The Company had
gone to considerable expense in constructing the pier of stone cribs.
It would be impossible for the steamer to land at any other point.
Thorpe had undisputed possession of the shore, but the Company could
as indisputably remove the dock.  Let it stay where it was.  Both
companies could then use it for their mutual convenience.

To this Thorpe agreed.  Baker, the walking-boss, tried to get him to
sign a contract to that effect.  Thorpe refused.

"Leave your dock where it is and use it when you want to," said
he.  "I'll agree not to interfere as long as you people behave
yourselves."

The actual logging was opening up well.  Both Shearer and Thorpe
agreed that it would not do to be too ambitious the first year.
They set about clearing their banking ground about a half mile
below the first dam; and during the six weeks before snow-fall cut
three short roads of half a mile each.  Approximately two million
feet would be put in from these--roads which could be extended in
years to come--while another million could be travoyed directly to
the landing from its immediate vicinity.

"We won't skid them," said Tim.  "We'll haul from the stump to the
bank.  And we'll tackle only a snowroad proposition:--we ain't got
time to monkey with buildin' sprinklers and plows this year.  We'll
make a little stake ahead, and then next year we'll do it right and
get in twenty million.  That railroad'll get along a ways by then,
and men'll be more plenty."

Through the lengthening evenings they sat crouched on wooden boxes
either side of the stove, conversing rarely, gazing at one spot
with a steady persistency which was only an outward indication of
the persistency with which their minds held to the work in hand.
Tim, the older at the business, showed this trait more strongly
than Thorpe.  The old man thought of nothing but logging.  From
the stump to the bank, from the bank to the camp, from the camp
to the stump again, his restless intelligence travelled tirelessly,
picking up, turning over, examining the littlest details with an
ever-fresh curiosity and interest.  Nothing was too small to escape
this deliberate scrutiny.  Nothing was in so perfect a state that it
did not bear one more inspection.  He played the logging as a chess
player his game.  One by one he adopted the various possibilities,
remote and otherwise, as hypotheses, and thought out to the uttermost
copper rivet what would be the best method of procedure in case that
possibility should confront him.

Occasionally Thorpe would introduce some other topic of conversation.
The old man would listen to his remark with the attention of courtesy;
would allow a decent period of silence to intervene; and then,
reverting to the old subject without comment on the new, would emit
one of his terse practical suggestions, result of a long spell of
figuring.  That is how success is made.

In the men's camp the crew lounged, smoked, danced, or played cards.
In those days no one thought of forbidding gambling.  One evening
Thorpe, who had been too busy to remember Phil's violin,--although
he noticed, as he did every other detail of the camp, the cripple's
industry, and the precision with which he performed his duties,--
strolled over and looked through the window.  A dance was in progress.
The men were waltzing, whirling solemnly round and round, gripping
firmly each other's loose sleeves just above the elbow.  At every
third step of the waltz they stamped one foot.

Perched on a cracker box sat Phil.  His head was thrust forward
almost aggressively over his instrument, and his eyes glared at the
dancing men with the old wolf-like gleam.  As he played, he drew the
bow across with a swift jerk, thrust it back with another, threw
his shoulders from one side to the other in abrupt time to the
music.  And the music!  Thorpe unconsciously shuddered; then sighed
in pity.  It was atrocious.  It was not even in tune.  Two out of
three of the notes were either sharp or flat, not so flagrantly as
to produce absolute disharmony, but just enough to set the teeth on
edge.  And the rendition was as colorless as that of a poor hand-
organ.

The performer seemed to grind out his fearful stuff with a fierce
delight, in which appeared little of the esthetic pleasure of the
artist.  Thorpe was at a loss to define it.

"Poor Phil," he said to himself.  "He has the musical soul without
even the musical ear!"

Next day, while passing out of the cook camp he addressed one of
the men:

"Well, Billy," he inquired, "how do you like your fiddler?"

"All RIGHT!" replied Billy with emphasis.  "She's got some go to her."

In the woods the work proceeded finely.  From the travoy sledges and
the short roads a constant stream of logs emptied itself on the
bank.  There long parallel skidways had been laid the whole width
of the river valley.  Each log as it came was dragged across those
monster andirons and rolled to the bank of the river.  The cant-hook
men dug their implements into the rough bark, leaned, lifted, or
clung to the projecting stocks until slowly the log moved, rolling
with gradually increasing momentum.  Then they attacked it with fury
lest the momentum be lost.  Whenever it began to deviate from the
straight rolling necessary to keep it on the center of the skids,
one of the workers thrust the shoe of his cant-hook under one end
of the log.  That end promptly stopped; the other, still rolling,
soon caught up; and the log moved on evenly, as was fitting.

At the end of the rollway the log collided with other logs and
stopped with the impact of one bowling ball against another.  The
men knew that being caught between the two meant death or crippling
for life.  Nevertheless they escaped from the narrowing interval at
the latest possible moment, for it is easier to keep a log rolling
than to start it.

Then other men piled them by means of long steel chains and horses,
just as they would have skidded them in the woods.  Only now the logs
mounted up and up until the skidways were thirty or forty feet high.
Eventually the pile of logs would fill the banking ground utterly,
burying the landing under a nearly continuous carpet of timber as
thick as a two-story house is tall.  The work is dangerous.  A saw
log containing six hundred board feet weighs about one ton.  This is
the weight of an ordinary iron safe.  When one of them rolls or falls
from even a moderate height, its force is irresistible.  But when
twenty or thirty cascade down the bold front of a skidway, carrying
a man or so with them, the affair becomes a catastrophe.

Thorpe's men, however, were all old-timers, and nothing of the sort
occurred.  At first it made him catch his breath to see the apparent
chances they took; but after a little he perceived that seeming
luck was in reality a coolness of judgment and a long experience in
the peculiar ways of that most erratic of inanimate cussedness--the
pine log.  The banks grew daily.  Everybody was safe and sound.

The young lumberman had sense enough to know that, while a crew
such as his is supremely effective, it requires careful handling to
keep it good-humored and willing.  He knew every man by his first
name, and each day made it a point to talk with him for a moment
or so.  The subject was invariably some phase of the work.  Thorpe
never permitted himself the familiarity of introducing any other
topic.  By this course he preserved the nice balance between too
great reserve, which chills the lumber-jack's rather independent
enthusiasm, and the too great familiarity, which loses his respect.
He never replied directly to an objection or a request, but listened
to it non-committally; and later, without explanation or reasoning,
acted as his judgment dictated.  Even Shearer, with whom he was in
most intimate contact, respected this trait in him.  Gradually he
came to feel that he was making a way with his men.  It was a
status, not assured as yet nor even very firm, but a status for
all that.

Then one day one of the best men, a teamster, came in to make some
objection to the cooking.  As a matter of fact, the cooking was
perfectly good.  It generally is, in a well-conducted camp, but
the lumber-jack is a great hand to growl, and he usually begins
with his food.

Thorpe listened to his vague objections in silence.

"All right," he remarked simply.

Next day he touched the man on the shoulder just as he was starting
to work.

"Step into the office and get your time," said he.

"What's the matter?" asked the man.

"I don't need you any longer."

The two entered the little office.  Thorpe looked through the ledger
and van book, and finally handed the man his slip.

"Where do I get this?" asked the teamster, looking at it uncertainly.

"At the bank in Marquette," replied Thorpe without glancing around.

"Have I got to go 'way up to Marquette?"

"Certainly," replied Thorpe briefly.

"Who's going to pay my fare south?"

"You are.  You can get work at Marquette."

"That ain't a fair shake," cried the man excitedly.

"I'll have no growlers in this camp," said Thorpe with decision.

"By God!" cried the man, "you damned---"

"You get out of here!" cried Thorpe with a concentrated blaze of
energetic passion that made the fellow step back.

"I ain't goin' to get on the wrong side of the law by foolin' with
this office," cried the other at the door, "but if I had you
outside for a minute---"

"Leave this office!" shouted Thorpe.

"S'pose you make me!" challenged the man insolently.

In a moment the defiance had come, endangering the careful structure
Thorpe had reared with such pains.  The young man was suddenly angry
in exactly the same blind, unreasoning manner as when he had leaped
single-handed to tackle Dyer's crew.

Without a word he sprang across the shack, seized a two-bladed ax
from the pile behind the door, swung it around his head and cast
it full at the now frightened teamster.  The latter dodged, and the
swirling steel buried itself in the snowbank beyond.  Without an
instant's hesitation Thorpe reached back for another.  The man took
to his heels.

"I don't want to see you around here again!" shouted Thorpe after
him.

Then in a moment he returned to the office and sat down overcome
with contrition.

"It might have been murder!" he told himself, awe-stricken.

But, as it happened, nothing could have turned out better.

Thorpe had instinctively seized the only method by which these
strong men could be impressed.  A rough-and-tumble attempt at
ejectment would have been useless.  Now the entire crew looked with
vast admiration on their boss as a man who intended to have his own
way no matter what difficulties or consequences might tend to deter
him.  And that is the kind of man they liked.  This one deed was
more effective in cementing their loyalty than any increase of
wages would have been.

Thorpe knew that their restless spirits would soon tire of the
monotony of work without ultimate interest.  Ordinarily the hope of
a big cut is sufficient to keep men of the right sort working for a
record.  But these men had no such hope--the camp was too small, and
they were too few.  Thorpe adopted the expedient, now quite common,
of posting the results of each day's work in the men's shanty.

Three teams were engaged in travoying, and two in skidding the logs,
either on the banking ground, or along the road.  Thorpe divided his
camp into four sections, which he distinguished by the names of the
teamsters.  Roughly speaking, each of the three hauling teams had its
own gang of sawyers and skidders to supply it with logs and to take
them from it, for of the skidding teams, one was split;--the horses
were big enough so that one of them to a skidway sufficed.  Thus
three gangs of men were performing each day practically the same
work.  Thorpe scaled the results, and placed them conspicuously for
comparison.

Red Jacket, the teamster of the sorrels, one day was credited with
11,OOO feet; while Long Pine Jim and Rollway Charley had put in
but 1O,500 and 1O,250 respectively.  That evening all the sawyers,
swampers, and skidders belonging to Red Jacket's outfit were
considerably elated; while the others said little and prepared
for business on the morrow.

Once Long Pine Jim lurked at the bottom for three days.  Thorpe
happened by the skidway just as Long Pine arrived with a log.  The
young fellow glanced solicitously at the splendid buckskins, the
best horses in camp.

"I'm afraid I didn't give you a very good team, Jimmy," said he,
and passed on.

That was all; but men of the rival gangs had heard.  In camp Long
Pine Jim and his crew received chaffing with balefully red glares.
Next day they stood at the top by a good margin, and always after
were competitors to be feared.

Injin Charley, silent and enigmatical as ever, had constructed a
log shack near a little creek over in the hardwood.  There he
attended diligently to the business of trapping.  Thorpe had brought
him a deer knife from Detroit; a beautiful instrument made of the
best tool steel, in one long piece extending through the buck-horn
handle.  One could even break bones with it.  He had also lent the
Indian the assistance of two of his Marquette men in erecting the
shanty; and had given him a barrel of flour for the winter.  From
time to time Injin Charley brought in fresh meat, for which he was
paid.  This with his trapping, and his manufacture of moccasins,
snowshoes and birch canoes, made him a very prosperous Indian indeed.
Thorpe rarely found time to visit him, but he often glided into the
office, smoked a pipeful of the white man's tobacco in friendly
fashion by the stove, and glided out again without having spoken a
dozen words.

Wallace made one visit before the big snows came, and was charmed.
He ate with gusto of the "salt-horse," baked beans, stewed prunes,
mince pie, and cakes.  He tramped around gaily in his moccasins or
on the fancy snowshoes he promptly purchased of Injin Chariey.
There was nothing new to report in regard to financial matters.
The loan had been negotiated easily on the basis of a mortgage
guaranteed by Carpenter's personal signature.  Nothing had been
heard from Morrison & Daly.

When he departed, he left behind him four little long-eared,
short-legged beagle hounds.  They were solemn animals, who took
life seriously.  Never a smile appeared in their questioning eyes.
Wherever one went, the others followed, pattering gravely along in
serried ranks.  Soon they discovered that the swamp over the knoll
contained big white hares.  Their mission in life was evident.
Thereafter from the earliest peep of daylight until the men quit
work at night they chased rabbits.  The quest was hopeless, but they
kept obstinately at it, wallowing with contained excitement over a
hundred paces of snow before they would get near enough to scare
their quarry to another jump.  It used to amuse the hares.  All day
long the mellow bell-tones echoed over the knoll.  It came in time
to be part of the color of the camp, just as were the pines and
birches, or the cold northern sky.  At the fall of night, exhausted,
trailing their long ears almost to the ground, they returned to the
cook, who fed them and made much of them.  Next morning they were
at it as hard as ever.  To them it was the quest for the Grail,--
hopeless, but glorious.

Little Phil, entrusted with the alarm clock, was the first up in
the morning  In the fearful biting cold of an extinct camp, he
lighted his lantern and with numb hands raked the ashes from the
stove.  A few sticks of dried pine topped by split wood of birch or
maple, all well dashed with kerosene, took the flame eagerly.  Then
he awakened the cook, and stole silently into the office, where
Thorpe and Shearer and Andrews, the surveyor, lay asleep.  There
quietly he built another fire, and filled the water-pail afresh.
By the time this task was finished, the cook sounded many times
a conch, and the sleeping camp awoke.

Later Phil drew water for the other shanties, swept out all three,
split wood and carried it in to the cook and to the living-camps,
filled and trimmed the lamps, perhaps helped the cook.  About half
the remainder of the day he wielded an ax, saw and wedge in the
hardwood, collecting painfully--for his strength was not great--
material for the constant fires it was his duty to maintain.  Often
he would stand motionless in the vast frozen, creaking forest,
listening with awe to the voices which spoke to him alone.  There
was something uncanny in the misshapen dwarf with the fixed marble
white face and the expressive changing eyes,--something uncanny,
and something indefinably beautiful.

He seemed to possess an instinct which warned him of the approach
of wild animals.  Long before a white man, or even an Indian, would
have suspected the presence of game, little Phil would lift his
head with a peculiar listening toss.  Soon, stepping daintily
through the snow near the swamp edge, would come a deer; or pat-
apat-patting on his broad hairy paws, a lynx would steal by.
Except Injin Charley, Phil was the only man in that country who
ever saw a beaver in the open daylight.

At camp sometimes when all the men were away and his own work was
done, he would crouch like a raccoon in the far corner of his deep
square bunk with the board ends that made of it a sort of little
cabin, and play to himself softly on his violin.  No one ever heard
him.  After supper he was docilely ready to fiddle to the men's
dancing.  Always then he gradually worked himself to a certain pitch
of excitement.  His eyes glared with the wolf-gleam, and the music
was vulgarly atrocious and out of tune.

As Christmas drew near, the weather increased in severity.  Blinding
snow-squalls swept whirling from the northeast, accompanied by a
high wind.  The air was full of it,--fine, dry, powdery, like the
dust of glass.  The men worked covered with it as a tree is covered
after a sleet.  Sometimes it was impossible to work at all for hours
at a time, but Thorpe did not allow a bad morning to spoil a good
afternoon.  The instant a lull fell on the storm, he was out with
his scaling rule, and he expected the men to give him something to
scale.  He grappled the fierce winter by the throat, and shook from
it the price of success.

Then came a succession of bright cold days and clear cold nights.
The aurora gleamed so brilliantly that the forest was as bright as
by moonlight.  In the strange weird shadow cast by its waverings the
wolves stole silently, or broke into wild ululations as they struck
the trail of game.  Except for these weird invaders, the silence of
death fell on the wilderness.  Deer left the country.  Partridges
crouched trailing under the snow.  All the weak and timid creatures
of the woods shrank into concealment and silence before these fierce
woods-marauders with the glaring famine-struck eyes.

Injin Charley found his traps robbed.  In return he constructed
deadfalls, and dried several scalps.  When spring came, he would
send them out for the bounty In the night, from time to time, the
horses would awake trembling at an unknown terror.  Then the long
weird howl would shiver across the starlight near at hand, and the
chattering man who rose hastily to quiet the horses' frantic
kicking, would catch a glimpse of gaunt forms skirting the edge
of the forest.

And the little beagles were disconsolate, for their quarry had
fled.  In place of the fan-shaped triangular trail for which they
sought, they came upon dog-like prints.  These they sniffed at
curiously, and then departed growling, the hair on their backbones
erect and stiff.



Chapter XXXII


By the end of the winter some four million feet of logs were piled
in the bed or upon the banks of the stream.  To understand what that
means, you must imagine a pile of solid timber a mile in length.
This tremendous mass lay directly in the course of the stream.  When
the winter broke up, it had to be separated and floated piecemeal
down the current.  The process is an interesting and dangerous one,
and one of great delicacy.  It requires for its successful completion
picked men of skill, and demands as toll its yearly quota of crippled
and dead.  While on the drive, men work fourteen hours a day, up to
their waists in water filled with floating ice.

On the Ossawinamakee, as has been stated, three dams had been
erected to simplify the process of driving.  When the logs were in
right distribution, the gates were raised, and the proper head of
water floated them down.

Now the river being navigable, Thorpe was possessed of certain
rights on it.  Technically he was entitled to a normal head of
water, whenever he needed it; or a special head, according to
agreement with the parties owning the dam.  Early in the drive, he
found that Morrison & Daly intended to cause him trouble.  It began
in a narrows of the river between high, rocky banks.  Thorpe's drive
was floating through close-packed.  The situation was ticklish.
Men with spiked boots ran here and there from one bobbing log to
another, pushing with their peaveys, hurrying one log, retarding
another, working like beavers to keep the whole mass straight.
The entire surface of the water was practically covered with the
floating timbers.  A moment's reflection will show the importance
of preserving a full head of water.  The moment the stream should
drop an inch or so, its surface would contract, the logs would then
be drawn close together in the narrow space; and, unless an immediate
rise should lift them up and apart from each other, a jam would form,
behind which the water, rapidly damming, would press to entangle it
the more.

This is exactly what happened.  In a moment, as though by magic, the
loose wooden carpet ground together.  A log in the advance up-ended;
another thrust under it.  The whole mass ground together, stopped,
and began rapidly to pile up.  The men escaped to the shore in a
marvellous manner of their own.

Tim Shearer found that the gate at the dam above had been closed.
The man in charge had simply obeyed orders.  He supposed M. & D.
wished to back up the water for their own logs.

Tim indulged in some picturesque language.

"You ain't got no right to close off more'n enough to leave us th'
nat'ral flow unless by agreement," he concluded, and opened the gates.

Then it was a question of breaking the jam.  This had to be done
by pulling out or chopping through certain "key" logs which locked
the whole mass.  Men stood under the face of imminent ruin--over
them a frowning sheer wall of bristling logs, behind which pressed
the weight of the rising waters--and hacked and tugged calmly until
the mass began to stir.  Then they escaped.  A moment later, with a
roar, the jam vomited down on the spot where they had stood.  It was
dangerous work.  Just one half day later it had to be done again,
and for the same reason.

This time Thorpe went back with Shearer.  No one was at the dam, but
the gates were closed.  The two opened them again.

That very evening a man rode up on horseback inquiring for Mr. Thorpe.

"I'm he," said the young fellow.

The man thereupon dismounted and served a paper.  It proved to be
an injunction issued by Judge Sherman enjoining Thorpe against
interfering with the property of Morrison & Daly,--to wit, certain
dams erected at designated points on the Ossawinamakee.  There had
not elapsed sufficient time since the commission of the offense for
the other firm to secure the issuance of this interesting document,
so it was at once evident that the whole affair had been pre-arranged
by the up-river firm for the purpose of blocking off Thorpe's drive.
After serving the injunction, the official rode away.

Thorpe called his foreman.  The latter read the injunction attentively
through a pair of steel-bowed spectacles.

"Well, what you going to do?" he asked.

"Of all the consummate gall!" exploded Thorpe.  "Trying to enjoin me
from touching a dam when they're refusing me the natural flow!  They
must have bribed that fool judge.  Why, his injunction isn't worth
the powder to blow it up!"

"Then you're all right, ain't ye?" inquired Tim.

"It'll be the middle of summer before we get a hearing in court,"
said he.  "Oh, they're a cute layout!  They expect to hang me up
until it's too late to do anything with the season's cut!"

He arose and began to pace back and forth.

"Tim," said he, "is there a man in the crew who's afraid of nothing
and will obey orders?"

"A dozen," replied Tim promptly.

"Who's the best?"

"Scotty Parsons."

"Ask him to step here."

In a moment the man entered the office.

"Scotty," said Thorpe, "I want you to understand that I stand
responsible for whatever I order you to do."

"All right, sir," replied the man.

"In the morning," said Thorpe, "you take two men and build some
sort of a shack right over the sluice-gate of that second dam,--
nothing very fancy, but good enough to camp in.  I want you to
live there day and night.  Never leave it, not even for a minute.
The cookee will bring you grub.  Take this Winchester.  If any of
the men from up-river try to go out on the dam, you warn them off.
If they persist, you shoot near them.  If they keep coming, you
shoot at them.  Understand?"

"You bet," answered Scotty with enthusiasm.

"All right," concluded Thorpe.

Next day Scotty established himself, as had been agreed.  He did not
need to shoot anybody.  Daly himself came down to investigate the
state of affairs, when his men reported to him the occupancy of the
dam.  He attempted to parley, but Scotty would have none of it.

"Get out!" was his first and last word.

Daly knew men.  He was at the wrong end of the whip.  Thorpe's game
was desperate, but so was his need, and this was a backwoods country
a long ways from the little technicalities of the law.  It was one
thing to serve an injunction; another to enforce it.  Thorpe finished
his drive with no more of the difficulties than ordinarily bother a
riverman.

At the mouth of the river, booms of logs chained together at the
ends had been prepared.  Into the enclosure the drive was floated
and stopped.  Then a raft was formed by passing new manila ropes
over the logs, to each one of which the line was fastened by a
hardwood forked pin driven astride of it.  A tug dragged the raft
to Marquette.

Now Thorpe was summoned legally on two counts.  First, Judge Sherman
cited him for contempt of court.  Second, Morrison & Daly sued him
for alleged damages in obstructing their drive by holding open the
dam-sluice beyond the legal head of water.

Such is a brief but true account of the coup-de-force actually
carried out by Thorpe's lumbering firm in northern Michigan.  It
is better known to the craft than to the public at large, because
eventually the affair was compromised.  The manner of that
compromise is to follow.



Chapter XXXIII


Pending the call of trial, Thorpe took a three weeks' vacation to
visit his sister.  Time, filled with excitement and responsibility,
had erased from his mind the bitterness of their parting.  He had
before been too busy, too grimly in earnest, to allow himself the
luxury of anticipation.  Now he found himself so impatient that he
could hardly wait to get there.  He pictured their meeting, the
things they would say to each other.

As formerly, he learned on his arrival that she was not at home.  It
was the penalty of an attempted surprise.  Mrs. Renwick proved not
nearly so cordial as the year before; but Thorpe, absorbed in his
eagerness, did not notice it.  If he had, he might have guessed the
truth: that the long propinquity of the fine and the commonplace,
however safe at first from the insulation of breeding and natural
kindliness, was at last beginning to generate sparks.

No, Mrs. Renwick did not know where Helen was: thought she had gone
over to the Hughes's.  The Hughes live two blocks down the street
and three to the right, in a brown house back from the street.
Very well, then; she would expect Mr. Thorpe to spend the night.

The latter wandered slowly down the charming driveways of the little
western town.  The broad dusty street was brown with sprinkling from
numberless garden hose.  A double row of big soft maples met over it,
and shaded the sidewalk and part of the wide lawns.  The grass was
fresh and green.  Houses with capacious verandas on which were
glimpsed easy chairs and hammocks, sent forth a mild glow from a
silk-shaded lamp or two.  Across the evening air floated the sounds
of light conversation and laughter from these verandas, the tinkle
of a banjo, the thrum of a guitar.  Automatic sprinklers whirled and
hummed here and there.  Their delicious artificial coolness struck
refreshingly against the cheek.

Thorpe found the Hughes residence without difficulty, and turned up
the straight walk to the veranda.  On the steps of the latter a rug
had been spread.  A dozen youths and maidens lounged in well-bred
ease on its soft surface.  The gleam of white summer dresses, of
variegated outing clothes, the rustle o frocks, the tinkle of low,
well-bred laughter confused Thorpe, so that, as he approached the
light from a tall lamp just inside the hall, he hesitated, vainly
trying to make out the figures before him.

So it was that Helen Thorpe saw him first, and came fluttering to
meet him.

"Oh, Harry!  What a surprise!" she cried, and flung her arms about
his neck to kiss him.

"How do you do, Helen," he replied sedately.

This was the meeting he had anticipated so long.  The presence of
others brought out in him, irresistibly, the repression of public
display which was so strong an element of his character.

A little chilled, Helen turned to introduce him to her friends.  In
the cold light of her commonplace reception she noticed what in a
warmer effusion of feelings she would never have seen,--that her
brother's clothes were out of date and worn; and that, though his
carriage was notably strong and graceful, the trifling constraint
and dignity of his younger days had become almost an awkwardness
after two years among uncultivated men.  It occurred to Helen to be
just a little ashamed of him.

He took a place on the steps and sat without saying a word all the
evening.  There was nothing for him to say.  These young people
talked thoughtlessly, as young people do, of the affairs belonging
to their own little circle.  Thorpe knew nothing of the cotillion,
or the brake ride, or of the girl who visited Alice Southerland;
all of which gave occasion for so much lively comment.  Nor was
the situation improved when some of them, in a noble effort at
politeness, turned the conversation into more general channels.
The topics of the day's light talk were absolutely unknown to him.
The plays, the new books, the latest popular songs, jokes depending
for their point on an intimate knowledge of the prevailing vaudeville
mode, were as unfamiliar to him as Miss Alice Southerland's guest.
He had thought pine and forest and the trail so long, that he found
these square-elbowed subjects refusing to be jostled aside by any
trivialities.

So he sat there silent in the semi-darkness.  This man, whose
lightest experience would have aroused the eager attention of the
entire party, held his peace because he thought he had nothing to
say.

He took Helen back to Mrs. Renwick's about ten o'clock.  They
walked slowly beneath the broad-leaved maples, whose shadows
danced under the tall electric lights,--and talked.

Helen was an affectionate, warm-hearted girl.  Ordinarily she would
have been blind to everything except the delight of having her
brother once more with her.  But his apparently cold reception had
first chilled, then thrown her violently into a critical mood.  His
subsequent social inadequacy had settled her into the common-sense
level of everyday life.

"How have you done, Harry?" she inquired anxiously.  "Your letters
have been so vague."

"Pretty well," he replied.  "If things go right, I hope some day
to have a better place for you than this."

Her heart contracted suddenly.  It was all she could do to keep
from bursting into tears.  One would have to realize perfectly her
youth, the life to which she had been accustomed, the lack of
encouragement she had labored under, the distastefulness of her
surroundings, the pent-up dogged patience she had displayed during
the last two years, the hopeless feeling of battering against a
brick wall she always experienced when she received the replies
to her attempts on Harry's confidence, to appreciate how the
indefiniteness of his answer exasperated her and filled her
with sullen despair.  She said nothing for twenty steps.  Then:

"Harry," she said quietly, "can't you take me away from Mrs.
Renwick's this year?"

"I don't know, Helen.  I can't tell yet.  Not just now, at any rate."

"Harry," she cried, "you don't know what you're doing.  I tell you
I can't STAND Mrs. Renwick any longer."  She calmed herself with an
effort, and went on more quietly.  "Really, Harry, she's awfully
disagreeable.  If you can't afford to keep me anywhere else--" she
glanced timidly at his face and for the first time saw the strong
lines about the jaw and the tiny furrows between the eyebrows.  "I
know you've worked hard, Harry dear," she said with a sudden
sympathy, "and that you'd give me more, if you could.  But so have
I worked hard.  Now we ought to change this in some way.  I can get
a position as teacher, or some other work somewhere.  Won't you let
me do that?"

Thorpe was thinking that it would be easy enough to obtain Wallace
Carpenter's consent to his taking a thousand dollars from the
profits of the year.  But he knew also that the struggle in the
courts might need every cent the new company could spare.  It would
look much better were he to wait until after the verdict.  If
favorable, there would be no difficulty about sparing the money.  If
adverse, there would be no money to spare.  The latter contingency
he did not seriously anticipate, but still it had to be considered.
And so, until the thing was absolutely certain, he hesitated to
explain the situation to Helen for fear of disappointing her!

"I think you'd better wait, Helen," said he.  "There'll be time
enough for all that later when it becomes necessary.  You are very
young yet, and it will not hurt you a bit to continue your education
for a little while longer."

"And in the meantime stay with Mrs. Renwick?" flashed Helen.

"Yes.  I hope it will not have to be for very long."

"How long do you think, Harry?" pleaded the girl.

"That depends on circumstances," replied Thorpe

"Oh!" she cried indignantly.

"Harry," she ventured after a time, "why not write to Uncle Amos?"

Thorpe stopped and looked at her searchingly.

"You can't mean that, Helen," he said, drawing a long breath.

"But why not?" she persisted.

"You ought to know."

"Who would have done any different?  If you had a brother and
discovered that he had--appropriated--most all the money of a
concern of which you were president, wouldn't you think it your
duty to have him arrested?"

"No!" cried Thorpe suddenly excited.  "Never!  If he was my brother,
I'd help him, even if he'd committed murder!"

"We differ there," replied the girl coldly.  "I consider that Uncle
Amos was a strong man who did his duty as he saw it, in spite of his
feelings.  That he had father arrested is nothing against him in my
eyes.  And his wanting us to come to him since, seems to me very
generous.  I am going to write to him."

"You will do nothing of the kind," commanded Thorpe sternly.  "Amos
Thorpe is an unscrupulous man who became unscrupulously rich.  He
deliberately used our father as a tool, and then destroyed him.  I
consider that anyone of our family who would have anything to do
with him is a traitor!"

The girl did not reply.

Next morning Thorpe felt uneasily repentant for his strong language.
After all, the girl did lead a monotonous life, and he could not
blame her for rebelling against it from time to time.  Her remarks
had been born of the rebellion; they had meant nothing in themselves.
He could not doubt for a moment her loyalty to the family.

But he did not tell her so.  That is not the way of men of his stamp.
Rather he cast about to see what he could do.

Injin Charley had, during the winter just past, occupied odd
moments in embroidering with beads and porcupine quills a wonderful
outfit of soft buckskin gauntlets, a shirt of the same material, and
moccasins of moose-hide.  They were beautifully worked, and Thorpe,
on receiving them, had at once conceived the idea of giving them
to his sister.  To this end he had consulted another Indian near
Marquette, to whom he had confided the task of reducing the gloves
and moccasins.  The shirt would do as it was, for it was intended
to be worn as a sort of belted blouse.  As has been said, all were
thickly beaded, and represented a vast quantity of work.  Probably
fifty dollars could not have bought them, even in the north country.

Thorpe tendered this as a peace offering.  Not understanding women
in the least, he was surprised to see his gift received by a burst
of tears and a sudden exit from the room.  Helen thought he had
bought the things; and she was still sore from the pinch of the
poverty she had touched the evening before.  Nothing will exasperate
a woman more than to be presented with something expensive for which
she does not particularly care, after being denied, on the ground of
economy, something she wants very much.

Thorpe stared after her in hurt astonishment.  Mrs. Renwick sniffed.

That afternoon the latter estimable lady attempted to reprove Miss
Helen, and was snubbed; she persisted, and an open quarrel ensued.

"I will not be dictated to by you, Mrs. Renwick," said Helen, "and I
don't intend to have you interfere in any way with my family affairs."

"They won't stand MUCH investigation," replied Mrs. Renwick, goaded
out of her placidity.

Thorpe entered to hear the last two speeches.  He said nothing, but
that night he wrote to Wallace Carpenter for a thousand dollars.
Every stroke of the pen hurt him.  But of course Helen could not
stay here now.

"And to think, just to THINK that he let that woman insult me so,
and didn't say a word!" cried Helen to herself.

Her method would have been to have acted irrevocably on the spot,
and sought ways and means afterwards.  Thorpe's, however, was to
perfect all his plans before making the first step.

Wallace Carpenter was not in town.  Before the letter had followed
him to his new address, and the answer had returned, a week had
passed.  Of course the money was gladly put at Thorpe's disposal.
The latter at once interviewed his sister.

"Helen," he said, "I have made arrangements for some money.  What
would you like to do this year?"

She raised her head and looked at him with clear bright gaze.  If
he could so easily raise the money, why had he not done so before?
He knew how much she wanted it.  Her happiness did not count.  Only
when his quixotic ideas of family honor were attacked did he bestir
himself.

"I am going to Uncle Amos's," she replied distinctly.

"What?" asked Thorpe incredulously.

For answer she pointed to a letter lying open on the table.  Thorpe
took it and read:

"My dear Niece:

"Both Mrs. Thorpe and myself more than rejoice that time and
reflection have removed that, I must confess, natural prejudice
which the unfortunate family affair, to which I will not allude,
raised in your mind against us.  As we said long ago, our home is
your's when you may wish to make it so.  You state your present
readiness to come immediately.  Unless you wire to the contrary, we
shall expect you next Tuesday evening on the four-forty train.  I
shall be at the Central Station myself to meet you.  If your brother
is now with you, I should be pleased to see him also, and will be
most happy to give him a position with the firm.

"Aff. your uncle,

"Amos Thorpe.

"New York, June 6, 1883."

On finishing the last paragraph the reader crumpled the letter and
threw it into the grate.

"I am sorry you did that, Helen," said he, "but I don't blame you,
and it can't be helped.  We won't need to take advantage of his
'kind offer' now."

"I intend to do so, however," replied the girl coldly.

"What do you mean?"

"I mean," she cried, "that I am sick of waiting on your good
pleasure.  I waited, and slaved, and stood unbearable things for
two years.  I did it cheerfully.  And in return I don't get a civil
word, not a decent explanation, not even a--caress," she fairly
sobbed out the last word.  "I can't stand it any longer.  I have
tried and tried and tried, and then when I've come to you for the
littlest word of encouragement, you have pecked at me with those
stingy little kisses, and have told me I was young and ought to
finish my education.  You put me in uncongenial surroundings, and
go off into the woods camping yourself.  You refuse me money enough
to live in a three-dollar boarding-house, and you buy expensive
rifles and fishing tackle for yourself.  You can't afford to send
me away somewhere for the summer, but you bring me back gee-gaws
you have happened to fancy, worth a month's board in the country.
You haven't a cent when it is a question of what I want; but you
raise money quick enough when your old family is insulted.  Isn't
it my family too?  And then you blame me because, after waiting in
vain two years for you to do something, I start out to do the best
I can for myself.  I'm not of age but you're not my guardian!"

During this long speech Thorpe had stood motionless, growing paler
and paler.  Like most noble natures, when absolutely in the right,
he was incapable of defending himself against misunderstandings.
He was too wounded; he was hurt to the soul.

"You know that is not true, Helen," he replied, almost sternly.


"It IS true!" she asseverated, "and I'm THROUGH!"

"It's a little hard," said Thorpe passing his hand wearily before
his eyes, "to work hard this way for years, and then---"

She laughed with a hard little note of scorn.

"Helen," said Thorpe with new energy, "I forbid you to have anything
to do with Amos Thorpe.  I think he is a scoundrel and a sneak."

"What grounds have you to think so?"

"None," he confessed, "that is, nothing definite.  But I know men;
and I know his type.  Some day I shall be able to prove something.
I do not wish you to have anything to do with him."

"I shall do as I please," she replied, crossing her hands behind her.

Thorpe's eyes darkened.

"We have talked this over a great many times," he warned, "and
you've always agreed with me.  Remember, you owe something to the
family."

"Most of the family seem to owe something," she replied with a
flippant laugh.  "I'm sure I didn't choose the family.  If I had,
I'd have picked out a better one!"

The flippancy was only a weapon which she used unconsciously,
blindly, in her struggle.  The man could not know this.  His
face hardened, and his voice grew cold.

"You may take your choice, Helen," he said formally.  "If you go
into the household of Amos Thorpe, if you deliberately prefer your
comfort to your honor, we will have nothing more in common."

They faced each other with the cool, deadly glance of the race, so
similar in appearance but so unlike in nature.

"I, too, offer you a home, such as it is," repeated the man.
"Choose!"

At the mention of the home for which means were so quickly
forthcoming when Thorpe, not she, considered it needful, the girl's
eyes flashed.  She stooped and dragged violently from beneath the
bed a flat steamer trunk, the lid of which she threw open.  A dress
lay on the bed.  With a fine dramatic gesture she folded the garment
and laid it in the bottom of the trunk.  Then she knelt, and without
vouchsafing another glance at her brother standing rigid by the door,
she began feverishly to arrange the folds.

The choice was made.  He turned and went out.



Chapter XXXIV


With Thorpe there could be no half-way measure.  He saw that the
rupture with his sister was final, and the thrust attained him
in one of his few unprotected points.  It was not as though he
felt either himself or his sister consciously in the wrong.  He
acquitted her of all fault, except as to the deadly one of
misreading and misunderstanding.  The fact argued not a perversion
but a lack in her character.  She was other than he had thought her.

As for himself, he had schemed, worked, lived only for her.  He had
come to her from the battle expecting rest and refreshment.  To the
world he had shown the hard, unyielding front of the unemotional;
he had looked ever keenly outward; he had braced his muscles in the
constant tension of endeavor.  So much the more reason why, in the
hearts of the few he loved, he, the man of action, should find
repose; the man of sternness, should discover that absolute peace
of the spirit in which not the slightest motion of the will is
necessary, the man of repression should be permitted affectionate,
care-free expansion of the natural affection, of the full sympathy
which will understand and not mistake for weakness.  Instead of this,
he was forced into refusing where he would rather have given; into
denying where he would rather have assented; and finally into
commanding where he longed most ardently to lay aside the cloak of
authority.  His motives were misread; his intentions misjudged; his
love doubted.

But worst of all, Thorpe's mind could see no possibility of an
explanation.  If she could not see of her own accord how much he
loved her, surely it was a hopeless task to attempt an explanation
through mere words.  If, after all, she was capable of misconceiving
the entire set of his motives during the past two years, expostulation
would be futile.  In his thoughts of her he fell into a great
spiritual dumbness.  Never, even in his moments of most theoretical
imaginings, did he see himself setting before her fully and calmly
the hopes and ambitions of which she had been the mainspring.  And
before a reconciliation, many such rehearsals must take place in the
secret recesses of a man's being.

Thorpe did not cry out, nor confide in a friend, nor do anything
even so mild as pacing the floor.  The only outward and visible sign
a close observer might have noted was a certain dumb pain lurking in
the depths of his eyes like those of a wounded spaniel.  He was hurt,
but did not understand.  He suffered in silence, but without anger.
This is at once the noblest and the most pathetic of human suffering.

At first the spring of his life seemed broken.  He did not care for
money; and at present disappointment had numbed his interest in the
game.  It seemed hardly worth the candle.

Then in a few days, after his thoughts had ceased to dwell constantly
on the one subject, he began to look about him mentally.  Beneath his
other interests he still felt constantly a dull ache, something
unpleasant, uncomfortable.  Strangely enough it was almost identical
in quality with the uneasiness that always underlay his surface-
thoughts when he was worried about some detail of his business.
Unconsciously,--again as in his business,--the combative instinct
aroused.  In lack of other object on which to expend itself, Thorpe's
fighting spirit turned with energy to the subject of the lawsuit.

Under the unwonted stress of the psychological condition just
described, he thought at white heat.  His ideas were clear, and
followed each other quickly, almost feverishly.

After his sister left the Renwicks, Thorpe himself went to Detroit,
where he interviewed at once Northrop, the brilliant young lawyer
whom the firm had engaged to defend its case.

"I'm afraid we have no show," he replied to Thorpe's question.
"You see, you fellows were on the wrong side of the fence in trying
to enforce the law yourselves.  Of course you may well say that
justice was all on your side.  That does not count.  The only
recourse recognized for injustice lies in the law courts.  I'm
afraid you are due to lose your case."

"Well," said Thorpe, "they can't prove much damage."

"I don't expect that they will be able to procure a very heavy
judgment," replied Northrop.  "The facts I shall be able to adduce
will cut down damages.  But the costs will be very heavy."

"Yes," agreed Thorpe.

"And," then pursued Northrop with a dry smile, "they practically own
Sherman.  You may be in for contempt of court at their instigation.
As I understand it, they are trying rather to injure you than to
get anything out of it themselves."

"That's it," nodded Thorpe.

"In other words, it's a case for compromise."

"Just what I wanted to get at," said Thorpe with satisfaction.
"Now answer me a question.  Suppose a man injures Government or
State land by trespass.  The land is afterwards bought by another
party.  Has the latter any claim for damage against the trespasser?
Understand me, the purchaser bought AFTER the trespass was committed."

"Certainly," answered Northrop without hesitation.

"Provided suit is brought within six years of the time the trespass
was committed."

"Good!  Now see here.  These M. & D. people stole about a section of
Government pine up on that river, and I don't believe they've ever
bought in the land it stood on.  In fact I don't believe they
suspect that anyone knows they've been stealing.  How would it do,
if I were to buy that section at the Land Office, and threaten to
sue them for the value of the pine that originally stood on it?"

The lawyer's eyes glimmered behind the lenses of his pince-nez;
but, with the caution of the professional man he made no other
sign of satisfaction.

"It would do very well indeed," he replied, "but you'd have to
prove they did the cutting, and you'll have to pay experts to
estimate the probable amount of the timber.  Have you the
description of the section?"

"No," responded Thorpe, "but I can get it; and I can pick up
witnesses from the woodsmen as to the cutting."

"The more the better.  It is rather easy to discredit the testimony
of one or two.  How much, on a broad guess, would you estimate the
timber to come to?"

"There ought to be about eight or ten million," guessed Thorpe
after an instant's silence, "worth in the stump anywhere from
sixteen to twenty thousand dollars.  It would cost me only eight
hundred to buy it."

"Do so, by all means.  Get your documents and evidence all in shape,
and let me have them.  I'll see that the suit is discontinued then.
Will you sue them?"

"No, I think not," replied Thorpe.  "I'll just hold it back as a
sort of club to keep them in line."

The next day, he took the train north.  He had something definite
and urgent to do, and, as always with practical affairs demanding
attention and resource, he threw himself whole-souled into the
accomplishment of it.  By the time he had bought the sixteen forties
constituting the section, searched out a dozen witnesses to the
theft, and spent a week with the Marquette expert in looking over
the ground, he had fallen into the swing of work again.  His
experience still ached; but dully.

Only now he possessed no interests outside of those in the new
country; no affections save the half-protecting, good-natured
comradeship with Wallace, the mutual self-reliant respect that
subsisted between Tim Shearer and himself, and the dumb,
unreasoning dog-liking he shared with Injin Charley.  His eye
became clearer and steadier; his methods more simple and direct.
The taciturnity of his mood redoubled in thickness.  He was less
charitable to failure on the part of subordinates.  And the new
firm on the Ossawinamakee prospered.



Chapter XXXV


Five years passed.

In that time Thorpe had succeeded in cutting a hundred million feet
of pine.  The money received for this had all been turned back into
the Company's funds.  From a single camp of twenty-five men with
ten horses and a short haul of half a mile, the concern had
increased to six large, well-equipped communities of eighty to a
hundred men apiece, using nearly two hundred horses, and hauling
as far as eight or nine miles.

Near the port stood a mammoth sawmill capable of taking care of
twenty-two million feet a year, about which a lumber town had
sprung up.  Lake schooners lay in a long row during the summer
months, while busy loaders passed the planks from one to the other
into the deep holds.  Besides its original holding, the company had
acquired about a hundred and fifty million more, back near the
headwaters of tributaries to the Ossawinamakee.  In the spring and
early summer months, the drive was a wonderful affair.

During the four years in which the Morrison & Daly Company shared
the stream with Thorpe, the two firms lived in complete amity and
understanding.  Northrop had played his cards skillfully.  The older
capitalists had withdrawn suit.  Afterwards they kept scrupulously
within their rights, and saw to it that no more careless openings
were left for Thorpe's shrewdness.  They were keen enough business
men, but had made the mistake, common enough to established power,
of underrating the strength of an apparently insignificant opponent.
Once they understood Thorpe's capacity, that young man had no more
chance to catch them napping.

And as the younger man, on his side, never attempted to overstep
his own rights, the interests of the rival firms rarely clashed.  As
to the few disputes that did arise, Thorpe found Mr. Daly singularly
anxious to please.  In the desire was no friendliness, however.
Thorpe was watchful for treachery, and could hardly believe the
affair finished when at the end of the fourth year the M. & D.
sold out the remainder of its pine to a firm from Manistee, and
transferred its operations to another stream a few miles east,
where it had acquired more considerable holdings.

"They're altogether too confounded anxious to help us on that
freight, Wallace," said Thorpe wrinkling his brow uneasily.  "I
don't like it.  It isn't natural."

"No," laughed Wallace, "neither is it natural for a dog to draw a
sledge.  But he does it--when he has to.  They're afraid of you,
Harry: that's all."

Thorpe shook his head, but had to acknowledge that he could
evidence no grounds for his mistrust.

The conversation took place at Camp One, which was celebrated in
three states.  Thorpe had set out to gather around him a band of
good woodsmen.  Except on a pinch he would employ no others.

"I don't care if I get in only two thousand feet this winter, and
if a boy does that," he answered Shearer's expostulations, "it's
got to be a good boy."

The result of his policy began to show even in the second year.
Men were a little proud to say that they had put in a winter at
"Thorpe's One."  Those who had worked there during the first year
were loyally enthusiastic over their boss's grit and resourcefulness,
their camp's order, their cook's good "grub."  As they were
authorities, others perforce had to accept the dictum.  There grew
a desire among the better class to see what Thorpe's "One" might be
like.  In the autumn Harry had more applicants than he knew what to
do with.  Eighteen of the old men returned.  He took them all, but
when it came to distribution, three found themselves assigned to
one or the other of the new camps.  And quietly the rumor gained
that these three had shown the least willing spirit during the
previous winter.  The other fifteen were sobered to the industry
which their importance as veterans might have impaired.

Tim Shearer was foreman of Camp One; Scotty Parsons was drafted
from the veterans to take charge of Two; Thorpe engaged two men
known to Tim to boss Three and Four.  But in selecting the "push"
for Five he displayed most strikingly his keen appreciation of a
man's relation to his environment.  He sought out John Radway and
induced him to accept the commission.

"You can do it, John," said he, "and I know it.  I want you to
try; and if you don't make her go, I'll call it nobody's fault
but my own."

"I don't see how you dare risk it, after that Cass Branch deal,
Mr. Thorpe," replied Radway, almost brokenly.  "But I would like
to tackle it, I'm dead sick of loafing.  Sometimes it seems like
I'd die, if I don't get out in the woods again."

"We'll call it a deal, then," answered Thorpe.

The result proved his sagacity.  Radway was one of the best foremen
in the outfit.  He got more out of his men, he rose better to
emergencies, and he accomplished more with the same resources than
any of the others, excepting Tim Shearer.  As long as the work was
done for someone else, he was capable and efficient.  Only when he
was called upon to demand on his own account, did the paralyzing
shyness affect him.

But the one feature that did more to attract the very best element
among woodsmen, and so make possible the practice of Thorpe's theory
of success, was Camp One.  The men's accommodations at the other
five were no different and but little better than those in a
thousand other typical lumber camps of both peninsulas.  They slept
in box-like bunks filled with hay or straw over which blankets were
spread; they sat on a narrow hard bench or on the floor; they read
by the dim light of a lamp fastened against the big cross beam;
they warmed themselves at a huge iron stove in the center of the
room around which suspended wires and poles offered space for the
drying of socks; they washed their clothes when the mood struck them.
It was warm and comparatively clean.  But it was dark, without
ornament, cheerless.

The lumber-jack never expects anything different.  In fact, if he
were pampered to the extent of ordinary comforts, he would be apt
at once to conclude himself indispensable; whereupon he would
become worthless.

Thorpe, however, spent a little money--not much--and transformed
Camp One.  Every bunk was provided with a tick, which the men could
fill with hay, balsam, or hemlock, as suited them.  Cheap but
attractive curtains on wires at once brightened the room and shut
each man's "bedroom" from the main hall.  The deacon seat remained
but was supplemented by a half-dozen simple and comfortable chairs.
In the center of the room stood a big round table over which glowed
two hanging lamps.  The table was littered with papers and magazines.
Home life was still further suggested by a canary bird in a gilt cage,
a sleepy cat, and two pots of red geraniums.  Thorpe had further
imported a washerwoman who dwelt in a separate little cabin under
the hill.  She washed the men's belongings at twenty-five cents a
week, which amount Thorpe deducted from each man's wages, whether he
had the washing done or not.  This encouraged cleanliness.  Phil
scrubbed out every day, while the men were in the woods.

Such was Thorpe's famous Camp One in the days of its splendor.  Old
woodsmen will still tell you about it, with a longing reminiscent
glimmer in the corners of their eyes as they recall its glories and
the men who worked in it.  To have "put in" a winter in Camp One
was the mark of a master; and the ambition of every raw recruit to
the forest.  Probably Thorpe's name is remembered to-day more on
account of the intrepid, skillful, loyal men his strange genius
gathered about it, than for the herculean feat of having carved a
great fortune from the wilderness in but five years' time.

But Camp One was a privilege.  A man entered it only after having
proved himself; he remained in it only as long as his efficiency
deserved the honor.  Its members were invariably recruited from one
of the other four camps; never from applicants who had not been in
Thorpe's employ.  A raw man was sent to Scotty, or Jack Hyland, or
Radway, or Kerlie.  There he was given a job, if he happened to
suit, and men were needed.  By and by, perhaps, when a member of
Camp One fell sick or was given his time, Tim Shearer would send
word to one of the other five that he needed an axman or a sawyer,
or a loader, or teamster, as the case might be.  The best man in
the other camps was sent up.

So Shearer was foreman of a picked crew.  Probably no finer body of
men was ever gathered at one camp.  In them one could study at his
best the American pioneer.  It was said at that time that you had
never seen logging done as it should be until you had visited
Thorpe's Camp One on the Ossawinamakee.

Of these men Thorpe demanded one thing--success.  He tried never to
ask of them anything he did not believe to be thoroughly possible;
but he expected always that in some manner, by hook or crook, they
would carry the affair through.  No matter how good the excuse, it
was never accepted.  Accidents would happen, there as elsewhere; a
way to arrive in spite of them always exists, if only a man is
willing to use his wits, unflagging energy, and time.  Bad luck is
a reality; but much of what is called bad luck is nothing but a want
of careful foresight, and Thorpe could better afford to be harsh
occasionally to the genuine for the sake of eliminating the false.
If a man failed, he left Camp One.

The procedure was very simple.  Thorpe never explained his reasons
even to Shearer.

"Ask Tom to step in a moment," he requested of the latter.

"Tom," he said to that individual, "I think I can use you better
at Four.  Report to Kerlie there."

And strangely enough, few even of these proud and independent men
ever asked for their time, or preferred to quit rather than to work
up again to the glories of their prize camp.

For while new recruits were never accepted at Camp One, neither was
a man ever discharged there.  He was merely transferred to one of
the other foremen.

It is necessary to be thus minute in order that the reader may
understand exactly the class of men Thorpe had about his immediate
person.  Some of them had the reputation of being the hardest
citizens in three States, others were mild as turtle doves.  They
were all pioneers.  They had the independence, the unabashed eye,
the insubordination even, of the man who has drawn his intellectual
and moral nourishment at the breast of a wild nature.  They were
afraid of nothing alive.  From no one, were he chore-boy or
president, would they take a single word--with the exception always
of Tim Shearer and Thorpe.

The former they respected because in their picturesque guild he
was a master craftsman.  The latter they adored and quoted and
fought for in distant saloons, because he represented to them their
own ideal, what they would be if freed from the heavy gyves of vice
and executive incapacity that weighed them down.

And they were loyal.  It was a point of honor with them to stay
"until the last dog was hung."  He who deserted in the hour of
need was not only a renegade, but a fool.  For he thus earned a
magnificent licking if ever he ran up against a member of the
"Fighting Forty."  A band of soldiers they were, ready to attempt
anything their commander ordered, devoted, enthusiastically admiring.
And, it must be confessed, they were also somewhat on the order of
a band of pirates.  Marquette thought so each spring after the
drive, when, hat-tilted, they surged swearing and shouting down
to Denny Hogan's saloon.  Denny had to buy new fixtures when they
went away; but it was worth it.

Proud! it was no name for it.  Boast! the fame of Camp One spread
abroad over the land, and was believed in to about twenty per cent
of the anecdotes detailed of it--which was near enough the actual
truth.  Anecdotes disbelieved, the class of men from it would have
given it a reputation.  The latter was varied enough, in truth.
Some people thought Camp One must be a sort of hell-hole of roaring,
fighting devils.  Others sighed and made rapid calculations of the
number of logs they could put in, if only they could get hold of
help like that.

Thorpe himself, of course, made his headquarters at Camp One.
Thence he visited at least once a week all the other camps,
inspecting the minutest details, not only of the work, but of
the everyday life.  For this purpose he maintained a light box
sleigh and pair of bays, though often, when the snow became deep,
he was forced to snowshoes.

During the five years he had never crossed the Straits of Mackinaw.
The rupture with his sister had made repugnant to him all the
southern country.  He preferred to remain in the woods.  All winter
long he was more than busy at his logging.  Summers he spent at the
mill.  Occasionally he visited Marquette, but always on business.
He became used to seeing only the rough faces of men.  The vision of
softer graces and beauties lost its distinctness before this strong,
hardy northland, whose gentler moods were like velvet over iron, or
like its own summer leaves veiling the eternal darkness of the pines.

He was happy because he was too busy to be anything else.  The
insistent need of success which he had created for himself, absorbed
all other sentiments.  He demanded it of others rigorously.  He
could do no less than demand it of himself.  It had practically
become one of his tenets of belief.  The chief end of any man, as
he saw it, was to do well and successfully what his life found ready.
Anything to further this fore-ordained activity was good; anything
else was bad.  These thoughts, aided by a disposition naturally
fervent and single in purpose, hereditarily ascetic and conscientious
--for his mother was of old New England stock--gave to him in the
course of six years' striving a sort of daily and familiar religion
to which he conformed his life.

Success, success, success.  Nothing could be of more importance.
Its attainment argued a man's efficiency in the Scheme of Things,
his worthy fulfillment of the end for which a divine Providence had
placed him on earth.  Anything that interfered with it--personal
comfort, inclination, affection, desire, love of ease, individual
liking,--was bad.

Luckily for Thorpe's peace of mind, his habit of looking on men as
things helped him keep to this attitude of mind.  His lumbermen were
tools,--good, sharp, efficient tools, to be sure, but only because he
had made them so.  Their loyalty aroused in his breast no pride nor
gratitude.  He expected loyalty.  He would have discharged at once
a man who did not show it.  The same with zeal, intelligence, effort
--they were the things he took for granted.  As for the admiration
and affection which the Fighting Forty displayed for him personally,
he gave not a thought to it.  And the men knew it, and loved him the
more from the fact.

Thorpe cared for just three people, and none of them happened to
clash with his machine.  They were Wallace Carpenter, little Phil,
and Injin Charley.

Wallace, for reasons already explained at length, was always
personally agreeable to Thorpe.  Latterly, since the erection of
the mill, he had developed unexpected acumen in the disposal of the
season's cut to wholesale dealers in Chicago.  Nothing could have
been better for the firm.  Thereafter he was often in the woods,
both for pleasure and to get his partner's ideas on what the firm
would have to offer.  The entire responsibility at the city end of
the business was in his hands.

Injin Charley continued to hunt and trap in the country round about.
Between him and Thorpe had grown a friendship the more solid in that
its increase had been mysteriously without outward cause.  Once or
twice a month the lumberman would snowshoe down to the little cabin
at the forks.  Entering, he would nod briefly and seat himself on a
cracker-box.

"How do, Charley," said he.

"How do," replied Charley.

They filled pipes and smoked.  At rare intervals one of them made a
remark, tersely,

"Catch um three beaver las' week," remarked Charley.

"Good haul," commented Thorpe.

Or:

"I saw a mink track by the big boulder," offered Thorpe.

"H'm!" responded Charley in a long-drawn falsetto whine.

Yet somehow the men came to know each other better and better; and
each felt that in an emergency he could depend on the other to the
uttermost in spite of the difference in race.

As for Phil, he was like some strange, shy animal, retaining all
its wild instincts, but led by affection to become domestic.  He
drew the water, cut the wood, none better.  In the evening he
played atrociously his violin,--none worse--,bending his great white
brow forward with the wolf-glare in his eyes, swaying his shoulders
with a fierce delight in the subtle dissonances, the swaggering
exactitude of time, the vulgar rendition of the horrible tunes he
played.  And often he went into the forest and gazed wondering
through his liquid poet's eyes at occult things.  Above all, he
worshipped Thorpe.  And in turn the lumberman accorded him a
good-natured affection.  He was as indispensable to Camp One as
the beagles.

And the beagles were most indispensable.  No one could have got
along without them.  In the course of events and natural selection
they had increased to eleven.  At night they slept in the men's camp
underneath or very near the stove.  By daylight in the morning they
were clamoring at the door.  Never had they caught a hare.  Never
for a moment did their hopes sink.  The men used sometimes to amuse
themselves by refusing the requested exit.  The little dogs agonized.
They leaped and yelped, falling over each other like a tangle of
angleworms.  Then finally, when the door at last flung wide, they
precipitated themselves eagerly and silently through the opening.
A few moments later a single yelp rose in the direction of the
swamp; the band took up the cry.  From then until dark the glade
was musical with baying.  At supper time they returned straggling,
their expression pleased, six inches of red tongue hanging from the
corners of their mouths, ravenously ready for supper.

Strangely enough the big white hares never left the swamp.  Perhaps
the same one was never chased two days in succession.  Or it is
possible that the quarry enjoyed the harmless game as much as did
the little dogs.

Once only while the snow lasted was the hunt abandoned for a few
days.  Wallace Carpenter announced his intention of joining forces
with the diminutive hounds.

"It's a shame, so it is, doggies!" he laughed at the tried pack.
"We'll get one to-morrow."

So he took his shotgun to the swamp, and after a half hour's wait,
succeeded in killing the hare.  From that moment he was the hero of
those ecstacized canines.  They tangled about him everywhere.  He
hardly dared take a step for fear of crushing one of the open faces
and expectant, pleading eyes looking up at him.  It grew to be
a nuisance.  Wallace always claimed his trip was considerably
shortened because he could not get away from his admirers.



Chapter XXXVI


Financially the Company was rated high, and yet was heavily in
debt.  This condition of affairs by no means constitutes an anomaly
in the lumbering business.

The profits of the first five years had been immediately reinvested
in the business.  Thorpe, with the foresight that had originally led
him into this new country, saw farther than the instant's gain.  He
intended to establish in a few years more a big plant which would
be returning benefices in proportion not only to the capital
originally invested, but also in ratio to the energy, time, and
genius he had himself expended.  It was not the affair of a moment.
It was not the affair of half-measures, of timidity.

Thorpe knew that he could play safely, cutting a few millions a
year, expanding cautiously.  By this method he would arrive, but
only after a long period.

Or he could do as many other firms have done; start on borrowed
money.

In the latter case he had only one thing to fear, and that was
fire.  Every cent, and many times over, of his obligations would
be represented in the state of raw material.  All he had to do
was to cut it out by the very means which the yearly profits of
his business would enable him to purchase.  For the moment, he
owed a great deal; without the shadow of a doubt mere industry
would clear his debt, and leave him with substantial acquisitions
created, practically, from nothing but his own abilities.  The
money obtained from his mortgages was a tool which he picked up
an instant, used to fashion one of his own, and laid aside.

Every autumn the Company found itself suddenly in easy circumstances.
At any moment that Thorpe had chosen to be content with the progress
made, he could have, so to speak, declared dividends with his partner.
Instead of undertaking more improvements, for part of which he
borrowed some money, he could have divided the profits of the
season's cut.  But this he was not yet ready to do.

He had established five more camps, he had acquired over a hundred
and fifty million more of timber lying contiguous to his own, he
had built and equipped a modern high-efficiency mill, he had
constructed a harbor break-water and the necessary booms, he had
bought a tug, built a boarding-house.  All this costs money.  He
wished now to construct a logging railroad.  Then he promised
himself and Wallace that they would be ready to commence paying
operations.

The logging railroad was just then beginning to gain recognition.
A few miles of track, a locomotive, and a number of cars consisting
uniquely of wheels and "bunks," or cross beams on which to chain
the logs, and a fairly well-graded right-of-way comprised the
outfit.  Its use obviated the necessity of driving the river--always
an expensive operation.  Often, too, the decking at the skidways
could be dispensed with; and the sleigh hauls, if not entirely
superseded for the remote districts, were entirely so in the
country for a half mile on either side of the track, and in any
case were greatly shortened.  There obtained, too, the additional
advantage of being able to cut summer and winter alike.  Thus, the
plant once established, logging by railroad was not only easier but
cheaper.  Of late years it has come into almost universal use in
big jobs and wherever the nature of the country will permit.  The
old-fashioned, picturesque ice-road sleigh-haul will last as long
as north-woods lumbering,--even in the railroad districts,--but the
locomotive now does the heavy work.

With the capital to be obtained from the following winter's product,
Thorpe hoped to be able to establish a branch which should run from
a point some two miles behind Camp One, to a "dump" a short distance
above the mill.  For this he had made all the estimates, and even the
preliminary survey.  He was therefore the more grievously
disappointed,
when Wallace Carpenter made it impossible for him to do so.

He was sitting in the mill-office one day about the middle of July.
Herrick, the engineer, had just been in.  He could not keep the
engine in order, although Thorpe knew that it could be done.

"I've sot up nights with her," said Herrick, "and she's no go.  I
think I can fix her when my head gets all right.  I got headachy
lately.  And somehow that last lot of Babbit metal didn't seem to
act just right."

Thorpe looked out of the window, tapping his desk slowly with the
end of a lead pencil.

"Collins," said he to the bookkeeper, without raising his voice or
altering his position, "make out Herrick's time."

The man stood there astonished.

"But I had hard luck, sir," he expostulated.  "She'll go all right
now, I think."

Thorpe turned and looked at him.

"Herrick," he said, not unkindly, "this is the second time this
summer the mill has had to close early on account of that engine.
We have supplied you with everything you asked for.  If you can't
do it, we shall have to get a man who can."

"But I had---" began the man once more.

"I ask every man to succeed in what I give him to do," interrupted
Thorpe.  "If he has a headache, he must brace up or quit.  If his
Babbit doesn't act just right he must doctor it up; or get some more,
even if he has to steal it.  If he has hard luck, he must sit up
nights to better it.  It's none of my concern how hard or how easy
a time a man has in doing what I tell him to.  I EXPECT HIM TO DO IT.
If I have to do all a man's thinking for him, I may as well hire
Swedes and be done with it.  I have too many details to attend to
already without bothering about excuses."

The man stood puzzling over this logic.

"I ain't got any other job," he ventured.

"You can go to piling on the docks," replied Thorpe, "if you want to."

Thorpe was thus explicit because he rather liked Herrick.  It was
hard for him to discharge the man peremptorily, and he proved the
need of justifying himself in his own eyes.

Now he sat back idly in the clean painted little room with the big
square desk and the three chairs.  Through the door he could see
Collins, perched on a high stool before the shelf-like desk.  From
the open window came the clear, musical note of the circular saw,
the fresh aromatic smell of new lumber, the bracing air from
Superior sparkling in the offing.  He felt tired.  In rare moments
such as these, when the muscles of his striving relaxed, his mind
turned to the past.  Old sorrows rose before him and looked at him
with their sad eyes; the sorrows that had helped to make him what
he was.  He wondered where his sister was.  She would be twenty-two
years old now.  A tenderness, haunting, tearful, invaded his heart.
He suffered.  At such moments the hard shell of his rough woods life
seemed to rend apart.  He longed with a great longing for sympathy,
for love, for the softer influences that cradle even warriors
between the clangors of the battles.

The outer door, beyond the cage behind which Collins and his shelf
desk were placed, flew open.  Thorpe heard a brief greeting, and
Wallace Carpenter stood before him.

"Why, Wallace, I didn't know you were coming!" began Thorpe, and
stopped.  The boy, usually so fresh and happily buoyant, looked ten
years older.  Wrinkles had gathered between his eyes.  "Why, what's
the matter?" cried Thorpe.

He rose swiftly and shut the door into the outer office.  Wallace
seated himself mechanically.

"Everything! everything!" he said in despair.  "I've been a fool!
I've been blind!"

So bitter was his tone that Thorpe was startled.  The lumberman sat
down on the other side of the desk.

"That'll do, Wallace," he said sharply.  "Tell me briefly what is
the matter."

"I've been speculating!" burst out the boy.

"Ah!" said his partner.

"At first I bought only dividend-paying stocks outright.  Then I
bought for a rise, but still outright.  Then I got in with a fellow
who claimed to know all about it.  I bought on a margin.  There came
a slump.  I met the margins because I am sure there will be a rally,
but now all my fortune is in the thing.  I'm going to be penniless.
I'll lose it all."

"Ah!" said Thorpe.

"And the name of Carpenter is so old-established, so honorable!"
cried the unhappy boy, "and my sister!"

"Easy!" warned Thorpe.  "Being penniless isn't the worst thing that
can happen to a man."

"No; but I am in debt," went on the boy more calmly.  "I have given
notes.  When they come due, I'm a goner."

"How much?" asked Thorpe laconically.

"Thirty thousand dollars."

"Well, you have that amount in this firm."

"What do you mean?"

"If you want it, you can have it."

Wallace considered a moment.

"That would leave me without a cent," he replied.

"But it would save your commercial honor."

"Harry," cried Wallace suddenly, "couldn't this firm go on my note
for thirty thousand more?  Its credit is good, and that amount
would save my margins."

"You are partner," replied Thorpe, "your signature is as good as
mine in this firm."

"But you know I wouldn't do it without your consent," replied
Wallace reproachfully.  "Oh, Harry!" cried the boy, "when you
needed the amount, I let you have it!"

Thorpe smiled.

"You know you can have it, if it's to be had, Wallace.  I wasn't
hesitating on that account.  I was merely trying to figure out where
we can raise such a sum as sixty thousand dollars.  We haven't got
it."

"But you'll never have to pay it," assured Wallace eagerly.  "If I
can save my margins, I'll be all right."

"A man has to figure on paying whatever he puts his signature to,"
asserted Thorpe.  "I can give you our note payable at the end of a
year.  Then I'll hustle in enough timber to make up the amount.  It
means we don't get our railroad, that's all."

"I knew you'd help me out.  Now it's all right," said Wallace, with
a relieved air.

Thorpe shook his head.  He was already trying to figure how to
increase his cut to thirty million feet.

"I'll do it," he muttered to himself, after Wallace had gone out
to visit the mill.  "I've been demanding success of others for a
good many years; now I'll demand it of myself."






PART IV


THORPE'S DREAM GIRL



Chapter XXXVII


The moment had struck for the woman.  Thorpe did not know it, but
it was true.  A solitary, brooding life in the midst of grand
surroundings, an active, strenuous life among great responsibilities,
a starved, hungry life of the affections whence even the sister had
withdrawn her love,--all these had worked unobtrusively towards the
formation of a single psychological condition.  Such a moment comes
to every man.  In it he realizes the beauties, the powers, the
vastnesses which unconsciously his being has absorbed.  They rise
to the surface as a need, which, being satisfied, is projected into
the visible world as an ideal to be worshipped.  Then is happiness
and misery beside which the mere struggle to dominate men becomes
trivial, the petty striving with the forces of nature seems a little
thing.  And the woman he at that time meets takes on the qualities
of the dream; she is more than woman, less than goddess; she is the
best of that man made visible.

Thorpe found himself for the first time filled with the spirit of
restlessness.  His customary iron evenness of temper was gone, so
that he wandered quickly from one detail of his work to another,
without seeming to penetrate below the surface-need of any one
task.  Out of the present his mind was always escaping to a mystic
fourth dimension which he did not understand.  But a week before, he
had felt himself absorbed in the component parts of his enterprise,
the totality of which arched far over his head, shutting out the
sky.  Now he was outside of it.  He had, without his volition,
abandoned the creator's standpoint of the god at the heart of his
work.  It seemed as important, as great to him, but somehow it had
taken on a strange solidarity, as though he had left it a plastic
beginning and returned to find it hardened into the shapes of
finality.  He acknowledged it admirable,--and wondered how he had
ever accomplished it!  He confessed that it should be finished as
it had begun,--and could not discover in himself the Titan who had
watched over its inception.

Thorpe took this state of mind much to heart, and in combating it
expended more energy than would have sufficed to accomplish the
work.  Inexorably he held himself to the task.  He filled his mind
full of lumbering.  The millions along the bank on section nine must
be cut and travoyed directly to the rollways.  It was a shame that
the necessity should arise.  From section nine Thorpe had hoped to
lighten the expenses when finally he should begin operations on the
distant and inaccessible headwaters of French Creek.  Now there was
no help for it.  The instant necessity was to get thirty millions
of pine logs down the river before Wallace Carpenter's notes came
due.  Every other consideration had to yield before that.  Fifteen
millions more could be cut on seventeen, nineteen, and eleven,--
regions hitherto practically untouched,--by the men in the four
camps inland.  Camp One and Camp Three could attend to section nine.

These were details to which Thorpe applied his mind.  As he pushed
through the sun-flecked forest, laying out his roads, placing his
travoy trails, spying the difficulties that might supervene to mar
the fair face of honest labor, he had always this thought before
him,--that he must apply his mind.  By an effort, a tremendous
effort, he succeeded in doing so.  The effort left him limp.  He
found himself often standing, or moving gently, his eyes staring
sightless, his mind cradled on vague misty clouds of absolute
inaction, his will chained so softly and yet so firmly that he felt
no strength and hardly the desire to break from the dream that lulled
him.  Then he was conscious of the physical warmth of the sun, the
faint sweet woods smells, the soothing caress of the breeze, the
sleepy cicada-like note of the pine creeper.  Through his half-closed
lashes the tangled sun-beams made soft-tinted rainbows.  He wanted
nothing so much as to sit on the pine needles there in the golden
flood of radiance, and dream--dream on--vaguely, comfortably,
sweetly--dream of the summer---

Thorpe, with a mighty and impatient effort, snapped the silken
cords asunder.

"Lord, Lord!" he cried impatiently.  "What's coming to me?  I must
be a little off my feed!"

And he hurried rapidly to his duties.  After an hour of the hardest
concentration he had ever been required to bestow on a trivial
subject, he again unconsciously sank by degrees into the old apathy.

"Glad it isn't the busy season!" he commented to himself.  "Here, I
must quit this!  Guess it's the warm weather.  I'll get down to the
mill for a day or two."

There he found himself incapable of even the most petty routine
work.  He sat to his desk at eight o'clock and began the perusal
of a sheaf of letters, comprising a certain correspondence, which
Collins brought him.  The first three he read carefully; the
following two rather hurriedly; of the next one he seized only the
salient and essential points; the seventh and eighth he skimmed;
the remainder of the bundle he thrust aside in uncontrollable
impatience.  Next day he returned to the woods.

The incident of the letters had aroused to the full his old fighting
spirit, before which no mere instincts could stand.  He clamped the
iron to his actions and forced them to the way appointed.  Once more
his mental processes became clear and incisive, his commands direct
and to the point.  To all outward appearance Thorpe was as before.

He opened Camp One, and the Fighting Forty came back from distant
drinking joints.  This was in early September, when the raspberries
were entirely done and the blackberries fairly in the way of
vanishing.  That able-bodied and devoted band of men was on hand
when needed.  Shearer, in some subtle manner of his own, had let
them feel that this year meant thirty million or "bust."  They
tightened their leather belts and stood ready for commands.  Thorpe
set them to work near the river, cutting roads along the lines he
had blazed to the inland timber on seventeen and nineteen.  After
much discussion with Shearer the young man decided to take out the
logs from eleven by driving them down French Creek.

To this end a gang was put to clearing the creekbed.  It was a
tremendous job.  Centuries of forest life had choked the little
stream nearly to the level of its banks.  Old snags and stumps lay
imbedded in the ooze; decayed trunks, moss-grown, blocked the
current; leaning tamaracks, fallen timber, tangled vines, dense
thickets gave to its course more the appearance of a tropical
jungle than of a north country brook-bed.  All these things had to
be removed, one by one, and either piled to one side or burnt.  In
the end, however, it would pay.  French Creek was not a large stream,
but it could be driven during the time of the spring freshets.

Each night the men returned in the beautiful dreamlike twilight to
the camp.  There they sat, after eating, smoking their pipes in the
open air.  Much of the time they sang, while Phil, crouching wolf-
like over his violin, rasped out an accompaniment of dissonances.
From a distance it softened and fitted pleasantly into the framework
of the wilderness.  The men's voices lent themselves well to the
weird minor strains of the chanteys.  These times--when the men sang,
and the night-wind rose and died in the hemlock tops--were Thorpe's
worst moments.  His soul, tired with the day's iron struggle, fell
to brooding.  Strange thoughts came to him, strange visions.  He
wanted something he knew not what; he longed, and thrilled, and
aspired to a greater glory than that of brave deeds, a softer
comfort than his old foster mother, the wilderness, could bestow.

The men were singing in a mighty chorus, swaying their heads in
unison, and bringing out with a roar the emphatic words of the
crude ditties written by some genius from their own ranks.


  "Come all ye sons of freedom throughout old Michigan,
   Come all ye gallant lumbermen, list to a shanty man.
   On the banks of the Muskegon, where the rapid waters flow,
   OH!--we'll range the wild woods o'er while a-lumbering we go."


Here was the bold unabashed front of the pioneer, here was absolute
certainty in the superiority of his calling,--absolute scorn of all
others.  Thorpe passed his hand across his brow.  The same spirit was
once fully and freely his.


  "The music of our burnished ax shall make the woods resound,
   And many a lofty ancient pine will tumble to the ground.
   At night around our shanty fire we'll sing while rude winds blow,
   OH!--we'll range the wild woods o'er while a-lumbering we go!"


That was what he was here for.  Things were going right.  It would
be pitiful to fail merely on account of this idiotic lassitude, this
unmanly weakness, this boyish impatience and desire for play.  He a
woodsman! He a fellow with these big strong men!

A single voice, clear and high, struck into a quick measure:


  "I am a jolly shanty boy,
     As you will soon discover;
   To all the dodges I am fly,
     A hustling pine-woods rover.
   A peavey-hook it is my pride,
     An ax I well can handle.
   To fell a tree or punch a bull,
     Get rattling Danny Randall."


And then with a rattle and crash the whole Fighting Forty shrieked
out the chorus:


  "Bung yer eye! bung yer eye!"


Active, alert, prepared for any emergency that might arise; hearty,
ready for everything, from punching bulls to felling trees--that
was something like!  Thorpe despised himself.  The song went on.


  "I love a girl in Saginaw,
     She lives with her mother.
   I defy all Michigan
     To find such another.
   She's tall and slim, her hair is red,
     Her face is plump and pretty.
   She's my daisy Sunday best-day girl,
     And her front name stands for Kitty."


And again as before the Fighting Forty howled truculently:


"Bung yer eye! bung yer eye!"


The words were vulgar, the air a mere minor chant.  Yet Thorpe's
mind was stilled.  His aroused subconsciousness had been engaged
in reconstructing these men entire as their songs voiced rudely
the inner characteristics of their beings.  Now his spirit halted,
finger on lip.  Their bravery, pride of caste, resource, bravado,
boastfulness,--all these he had checked off approvingly.  Here now
was the idea of the Mate.  Somewhere for each of them was a "Kitty,"
a "daisy Sunday best-day girl"; the eternal feminine; the softer
side; the tenderness, beauty, glory of even so harsh a world as
they were compelled to inhabit.  At the present or in the past these
woods roisterers, this Fighting Forty, had known love.  Thorpe arose
abruptly and turned at random into the forest.  The song pursued
him as he went, but he heard only the clear sweet tones, not the
words.  And yet even the words would have spelled to his awakened
sensibilities another idea,--would have symbolized however rudely,
companionship and the human delight of acting a part before a woman.


  "I took her to a dance one night,
     A mossback gave the bidding--
   Silver Jack bossed the shebang,
     and Big Dan played the fiddle.
   We danced and drank the livelong night
     With fights between the dancing,
   Till Silver Jack cleaned out the ranch
     And sent the mossbacks prancing."


And with the increasing war and turmoil of the quick water the last
shout of the Fighting Forty mingled faintly and was lost.


  "Bung yer eye! bung yer eye!"


Thorpe found himself at the edge of the woods facing a little glade
into which streamed the radiance of a full moon.



Chapter XXXVIII


There he stood and looked silently, not understanding, not caring
to inquire.  Across the way a white-throat was singing, clear,
beautiful, like the shadow of a dream.  The girl stood listening.

Her small fair head was inclined ever so little sideways and her
finger was on her lips as though she wished to still the very hush
of night, to which impression the inclination of her supple body
lent its grace.  The moonlight shone full upon her countenance.
A little white face it was, with wide clear eyes and a sensitive,
proud mouth that now half parted like a child's.  Here eyebrows
arched from her straight nose in the peculiarly graceful curve
that falls just short of pride on the one side and of power on the
other, to fill the eyes with a pathos of trust and innocence.  The
man watching could catch the poise of her long white neck and the
molten moon-fire from her tumbled hair,--the color of corn-silk,
but finer.

And yet these words meant nothing.  A painter might have caught
her charm, but he must needs be a poet as well,--and a great poet,
one capable of grandeurs and subtleties.

To the young man standing there rapt in the spell of vague desire,
of awakened vision, she seemed most like a flower or a mist.  He
tried to find words to formulate her to himself, but did not succeed.
Always it came back to the same idea--the flower and the mist.  Like
the petals of a flower most delicate was her questioning, upturned
face; like the bend of a flower most rare the stalk of her graceful
throat; like the poise of a flower most dainty the attitude of her
beautiful, perfect body sheathed in a garment that outlined each
movement, for the instant in suspense.  Like a mist the glimmering
of her skin, the shining of her hair, the elusive moonlike quality
of her whole personality as she stood there in the ghost-like
clearing listening, her fingers on her lips.

Behind her lurked the low, even shadow of the forest where the moon
was not, a band of velvet against which the girl and the light-
touched twigs and bushes and grass blades were etched like frost
against a black window pane.  There was something, too, of the
frost-work's evanescent spiritual quality in the scene,--as though
at any moment, with a puff of the balmy summer wind, the radiant
glade, the hovering figure, the filagreed silver of the entire
setting would melt into the accustomed stern and menacing forest
of the northland, with its wolves, and its wild deer, and the voices
of its sterner calling.

Thorpe held his breath and waited.  Again the white-throat lifted
his clear, spiritual note across the brightness, slow, trembling
with.  The girl never moved.  She stood in the moonlight
like a beautiful emblem of silence, half real, half fancy, part
woman, wholly divine, listening to the little bird's message.

For the third time the song shivered across the night, then Thorpe
with a soft sob, dropped his face in his hands and looked no more.

He did not feel the earth beneath his knees, nor the whip of the
sumach across his face; he did not see the moon shadows creep
slowly along the fallen birch; nor did he notice that the white-
throat had hushed its song.  His inmost spirit was shaken.
Something had entered his soul and filled it to the brim, so that
he dared no longer stand in the face of radiance until he had
accounted with himself.  Another drop would overflow the cup.

Ah, sweet God, the beauty of it, the beauty of it!  That questing,
childlike starry gaze, seeking so purely to the stars themselves!
That flower face, those drooping, half parted lips!  That
inexpressible, unseizable something they had meant!  Thorpe searched
humbly--eagerly--then with agony through his troubled spirit, and in
its furthermost depths saw the mystery as beautifully remote as ever.
It approached and swept over him and left him gasping passion-racked.
Ah, sweet God, the beauty of it! the beauty of it! the vision! the
dream!

He trembled and sobbed with his desire to seize it, with his
impotence to express it, with his failure even to appreciate it
as his heart told him it should be appreciated.

He dared not look.  At length he turned and stumbled back through
the moonlit forest crying on his old gods in vain.

At the banks of the river he came to a halt.  There in the velvet
pines the moonlight slept calmly, and the shadows rested quietly
under the breezeless sky.  Near at hand the river shouted as ever
its cry of joy over the vitality of life, like a spirited boy
before the face of inscrutable nature.  All else was silence.  Then
from the waste boomed a strange, hollow note, rising, dying, rising
again, instinct with the spirit of the wilds.  It fell, and far away
sounded a heavy but distant crash.  The cry lifted again.  It was the
first bull moose calling across the wilderness to his mate.

And then, faint but clear down the current of a chance breeze
drifted the chorus of the Fighting Forty.


  "The forests so brown at our stroke go down,
     And cities spring up where they fell;
   While logs well run and work well done
     Is the story the shanty boys tell."


Thorpe turned from the river with a thrust forward of his head.  He
was not a religious man, and in his six years' woods experience had
never been to church.  Now he looked up over the tops of the pines
to where the Pleiades glittered faintly among the brighter stars.

"Thanks, God," said he briefly.



Chapter XXXIX


For several days this impression satisfied him completely.  He
discovered, strangely enough, that his restlessness had left him,
that once more he was able to give to his work his former energy
and interest.  It was as though some power had raised its finger
and a storm had stilled, leaving calm, unruffled skies.

He did not attempt to analyze this; he did not even make an effort
to contemplate it.  His critical faculty was stricken dumb and it
asked no questions of him.  At a touch his entire life had changed.
Reality or vision, he had caught a glimpse of something so entirely
different from anything his imagination or experience had ever
suggested to him, that at first he could do no more than permit
passively its influences to adjust themselves to his being.

Curiosity, speculation, longing,--all the more active emotions
remained in abeyance while outwardly, for three days, Harry Thorpe
occupied himself only with the needs of the Fighting Forty at Camp
One.

In the early morning he went out with the gang.  While they chopped
or heaved, he stood by serene.  Little questions of expediency he
solved.  Dilemmas he discussed leisurely with Tim Shearer.
Occasionally he lent a shoulder when the peaveys lacked of prying a
stubborn log from its bed.  Not once did he glance at the nooning
sun.  His patience was quiet and sure.  When evening came he smoked
placidly outside the office, listening to the conversation and
laughter of the men, caressing one of the beagles, while the rest
slumbered about his feet, watching dreamily the night shadows and
the bats.  At about nine o'clock he went to bed, and slept soundly.
He was vaguely conscious of a great peace within him, a great
stillness of the spirit, against which the metallic events of his
craft clicked sharply in vivid relief.  It was the peace and
stillness of a river before it leaps.

Little by little the condition changed.  The man felt vague
stirrings of curiosity.  He speculated aimlessly as to whether or
not the glade, the moonlight, the girl, had been real or merely the
figments of imagination.  Almost immediately the answer leaped at him
from his heart.  Since she was so certainly flesh and blood, whence
did she come? what was she doing there in the wilderness?  His mind
pushed the query aside as unimportant, rushing eagerly to the
essential point: When could he see her again?  How find for the
second time the vision before which his heart felt the instant need
of prostrating itself.  His placidity had gone.  That morning he made
some vague excuse to Shearer and set out blindly down the river.

He did not know where he was going, any more than did the bull moose
plunging through the trackless wilderness to his mate.  Instinct, the
instinct of all wild natural creatures, led him.  And so, without
thought, without clear intention even,--most would say by accident,--
he saw her again.  It was near the "pole trail"; which was less like
a trail than a rail-fence.

For when the snows are deep and snowshoes not the property of every
man who cares to journey, the old-fashioned "pole trail" comes into
use.  It is merely a series of horses built of timber across which
thick Norway logs are laid, about four feet from the ground, to
form a continuous pathway.  A man must be a tight-rope walker to
stick to the pole trail when ice and snow have sheathed its logs.
If he makes a misstep, he is precipitated ludicrously into feathery
depths through which he must flounder to the nearest timber horse
before he can remount.  In summer, as has been said, it resembles
nothing so much as a thick one-rail fence of considerable height,
around which a fringe of light brush has grown.

Thorpe reached the fringe of bushes, and was about to dodge under
the fence, when he saw her.  So he stopped short, concealed by the
leaves and the timber horse.

She stood on a knoll in the middle of a grove of monster pines.
There was something of the cathedral in the spot.  A hush dwelt in
the dusk, the long columns lifted grandly to the Roman arches of
the frond, faint murmurings stole here and there like whispering
acolytes.  The girl stood tall and straight among the tall, straight
pines like a figure on an ancient tapestry.  She was doing nothing--
just standing there--but the awe of the forest was in her wide,
clear eyes.

The great sweet feeling clutched the young man's throat again.  But
while the other,--the vision of the frost-work glade and the spirit-
like figure of silence,--had been unreal and phantasmagoric, this was
of the earth.  He looked, and looked, and looked again.  He saw the
full pure curve of her cheek's contour, neither oval nor round, but
like the outline of a certain kind of plum.  He appreciated the half-
pathetic downward droop of the corners of her mouth,--her red mouth
in dazzling, bewitching contrast to the milk-whiteness of her skin.
He caught the fineness of her nose, straight as a Grecian's, but
with some faint suggestion about the nostrils that hinted at piquance.
And the waving corn silk of her altogether charming and unruly hair,
the superb column of her long neck on which her little head poised
proudly like a flower, her supple body, whose curves had the long
undulating grace of the current in a swift river, her slender white
hand with the pointed fingers--all these he saw one after the other,
and his soul shouted within him at the sight.  He wrestled with the
emotions that choked him.  "Ah, God! Ah, God!" he cried softly to
himself like one in pain.  He, the man of iron frame, of iron nerve,
hardened by a hundred emergencies, trembled in every muscle before
a straight, slender girl, clad all in brown, standing alone in the
middle of the ancient forest.

In a moment she stirred slightly, and turned.  Drawing herself to
her full height, she extended her hands over her head palm outward,
and, with an indescribably graceful gesture, half mockingly bowed a
ceremonious adieu to the solemn trees.  Then with a little laugh she
moved away in the direction of the river.

At once Thorpe proved a great need of seeing her again.  In his
present mood there was nothing of the awe-stricken peace he had
experienced after the moonlight adventure.  He wanted the sight of
her as he had never wanted anything before.  He must have it, and he
looked about him fiercely as though to challenge any force in Heaven
or Hell that would deprive him of it.  His eyes desired to follow
the soft white curve of her cheek, to dance with the light of her
corn-silk hair, to delight in the poetic movements of her tall,
slim body, to trace the full outline of her chin, to wonder at
the carmine of her lips, red as a blood-spot on the snow.  These
things must be at once.  The strong man desired it.  And finding it
impossible, he raged inwardly and tore the tranquillities of his
heart, as on the shores of the distant Lake of Stars, the bull-
moose trampled down the bushes in his passion.

So it happened that he ate hardly at all that day, and slept ill,
and discovered the greatest difficulty in preserving the outward
semblance of ease which the presence of Tim Shearer and the
Fighting Forty demanded.

And next day he saw her again, and the next, because the need of
his heart demanded it, and because, simply enough, she came every
afternoon to the clump of pines by the old pole trail.

Now had Thorpe taken the trouble to inquire, he could have learned
easily enough all there was to be known of the affair.  But he did
not take the trouble.  His consciousness was receiving too many new
impressions, so that in a manner it became bewildered.  At first,
as has been seen, the mere effect of the vision was enough; then
the sight of the girl sufficed him.  But now curiosity awoke and
a desire for something more.  He must speak to her, touch her hand,
look into her eyes.  He resolved to approach her, and the mere
thought choked him and sent him weak.

When he saw her again from the shelter of the pole trail, he dared
not, and so stood there prey to a novel sensation,--that of being
baffled in an intention.  It awoke within him a vast passion
compounded part of rage at himself, part of longing for that which
he could not take, but most of love for the girl.  As he hesitated
in one mind but in two decisions, he saw that she was walking
slowly in his direction.

Perhaps a hundred paces separated the two.  She took them
deliberately,
pausing now and again to listen, to pluck a leaf, to smell the
fragrant balsam and fir tops as she passed them.  Her progression
was a series of poses, the one of which melted imperceptibly into
the other without appreciable pause of transition.  So subtly did
her grace appeal to the sense of sight, that out of mere sympathy
the other senses responded with fictions of their own.  Almost could
the young man behind the trail savor a faint fragrance, a faint music
that surrounded and preceded her like the shadows of phantoms.  He
knew it as an illusion, born of his desire, and yet it was a noble
illusion, for it had its origin in her.

In a moment she had reached the fringe of brush about the pole trail.
They stood face to face.

She gave a little start of surprise, and her hand leaped to her
breast, where it caught and stayed.  Her childlike down-drooping
mouth parted a little more, and the breath quickened through it.
But her eyes, her wide, trusting, innocent eyes, sought his and
rested.

He did not move.  The eagerness, the desire, the long years of
ceaseless struggle, the thirst for affection, the sob of awe at the
moonlit glade, the love,--all these flamed in his eyes and fixed his
gaze in an unconscious ardor that had nothing to do with convention
or timidity.  One on either side of the spike-marked old Norway log
of the trail they stood, and for an appreciable interval the duel
of their glances lasted,--he masterful, passionate, exigent; she
proud, cool, defensive in the aloofness of her beauty.  Then at
last his prevailed.  A faint color rose from her neck, deepened,
and spread over her face and forehead.  In a moment she dropped
her eyes.

"Don't you think you stare a little rudely--Mr. Thorpe?" she asked.



Chapter XL


The vision was over, but the beauty remained.  The spoken words of
protest made her a woman.  Never again would she, nor any other
creature of the earth, appear to Thorpe as she had in the silver
glade or the cloistered pines.  He had had his moment of insight.
The deeps had twice opened to permit him to look within.  Now they
had closed again.  But out of them had fluttered a great love and the
priestess of it.  Always, so long as life should be with him, Thorpe
was destined to see in this tall graceful girl with the red lips
and the white skin and the corn-silk hair, more beauty, more of the
great mysterious spiritual beauty which is eternal, than her father
or her mother or her dearest and best.  For to them the vision had
not been vouchsafed, while he had seen her as the highest symbol of
God's splendor.

Now she stood before him, her head turned half away, a faint flush
still tingeing the chalk-white of her skin, watching him with a dim,
half-pleading smile in expectation of his reply.

"Ah, moon of my soul! light of my life!" he cried, but he cried
it within him, though it almost escaped his vigilance to his lips.
What he really said sounded almost harsh in consequence.

"How did you know my name?" he asked.

She planted both elbows on the Norway and framed her little face
deliciously with her long pointed hands.

"If Mr. Harry Thorpe can ask that question," she replied, "he is
not quite so impolite as I had thought him."

"If you don't stop pouting your lips, I shall kiss them!" cried
Harry--to himself.

"How is that?" he inquired breathlessly.

"Don't you know who I am?" she asked in return.

"A goddess, a beautiful woman!" he answered ridiculously enough.

She looked straight at him.  This time his gaze dropped.

"I am a friend of Elizabeth Carpenter, who is Wallace Carpenter's
sister, who I believe is Mr. Harry Thorpe's partner."

She paused as though for comment.  The young man opposite was
occupied in many other more important directions.  Some moments
later the words trickled into his brain, and some moments after
that he realized their meaning.

"We wrote Mr. Harry Thorpe that we were about to descend on his
district with wagons and tents and Indians and things, and asked
him to come and see us."

"Ah, heart o' mine, what clear, pure eyes she has!  How they look
at a man to drown his soul!"

Which, even had it been spoken, was hardly the comment one would
have expected.

The girl looked at him for a moment steadily, then smiled.  The
change of countenance brought Thorpe to himself, and at the same
moment the words she had spoken reached his comprehension.

"But I never received the letter.  I'm so sorry," said he.  "It
must be at the mill.  You see, I've been up in the woods for nearly
a month."

"Then we'll have to forgive you."

"But I should think they would have done something for you at the
mill---"

"Oh, we didn't come by way of your mill.  We drove from Marquette."

"I see," cried Thorpe, enlightened.  "But I'm sorry I didn't know.
I'm sorry you didn't let me know.  I suppose you thought I was still
at the mill.  How did you get along?  Is Wallace with you?"

"No," she replied, dropping her hands and straightening her erect
figure.  "It's horrid.  He was coming, and then some business came
up and he couldn't get away.  We are having the loveliest time
though.  I do adore the woods.  Come," she cried impatiently,
sweeping aside to leave a way clear, "you shall meet my friends."

Thorpe imagined she referred to the rest of the tenting party.  He
hesitated.

"I am hardly in fit condition," he objected.

She laughed, parting her red lips.  "You are extremely picturesque
just as you are," she said with rather embarrassing directness.  "I
wouldn't have you any different for the world.  But my friends don't
mind.  They are used to it."  She laughed again.

Thorpe crossed the pole trail, and for the first time found himself
by her side.  The warm summer odors were in the air, a dozen lively
little birds sang in the brush along the rail, the sunlight danced
and flickered through the openings.

Then suddenly they were among the pines, and the air was cool, the
vista dim, and the bird songs inconceivably far away.

The girl walked directly to the foot of a pine three feet through,
and soaring up an inconceivable distance through the still twilight.

"This is Jimmy," said she gravely.  "He is a dear good old rough
bear when you don't know him, but he likes me.  If you put your ear
close against him," she confided, suiting the action to the word,
"you can hear him talking to himself.  This little fellow is Tommy.
I don't care so much for Tommy because he's sticky.  Still, I like
him pretty well, and here's Dick, and that's Bob, and the one just
beyond is Jack."

"Where is Harry?" asked Thorpe.

"I thought one in a woods was quite sufficient," she replied with
the least little air of impertinence.

"Why do you name them such common, everyday names?" he inquired.

"I'll tell you.  It's because they are so big and grand themselves,
that it did not seem to me they needed high-sounding names.  What
do you think?" she begged with an appearance of the utmost anxiety.

Thorpe expressed himself as in agreement.  As the half-quizzical
conversation progressed, he found their relations adjusting
themselves with increasing rapidity.  He had been successively
the mystic devotee before his vision, the worshipper before his
goddess; now he was unconsciously assuming the attitude of the
lover before his mistress.  It needs always this humanizing touch
to render the greatest of all passions livable.

And as the human element developed, he proved at the same time
greater and greater difficulty in repressing himself and greater
and greater fear of the results in case he should not do so.  He
trembled with the desire to touch her long slender hand, and as
soon as his imagination had permitted him that much he had already
crushed her to him and had kissed passionately her starry face.
Words hovered on his lips longing for flight.  He withheld them
by an effort that left him almost incoherent, for he feared with
a deadly fear lest he lose forever what the vision had seemed to
offer to his hand.

So he said little, and that lamely, for he dreaded to say too much.
To her playful sallies he had no riposte.  And in consequence he
fell more silent with another boding--that he was losing his cause
outright for lack of a ready word.

He need not have been alarmed.  A woman in such a case hits as
surely as a man misses.  Her very daintiness and preciosity of
speech indicated it.  For where a man becomes stupid and silent,
a woman covers her emotions with words and a clever speech.  Not
in vain is a proud-spirited girl stared down in such a contest
of looks; brave deeds simply told by a friend are potent to win
interest in advance; a straight, muscular figure, a brown skin, a
clear, direct eye, a carriage of power and acknowledged authority,
strike hard at a young imagination; a mighty passion sweeps aside
the barriers of the heart.  Such a victory, such a friend, such a
passion had Thorpe.

And so the last spoken exchange between them meant nothing; but if
each could have read the unsaid words that quivered on the other's
heart, Thorpe would have returned to the Fighting Forty more
tranquilly, while she would probably not have returned to the
camping party at all for a number of hours.

"I do not think you had better come with me," she said.  "Make
your call and be forgiven on your own account.  I don't want to
drag you in at my chariot wheels."

"All right.  I'll come this afternoon," Thorpe had replied.

"I love her, I must have her.  I must go--at once," his soul had
cried, "quick--now--before I kiss her!"

"How strong he is," she said to herself, "how brave-looking; how
honest!  He is different from the other men.  He is magnificent."



Chapter XLI


That afternoon Thorpe met the other members of the party, offered
his apologies and explanations, and was graciously forgiven.  He
found the personnel to consist of, first of all, Mrs. Cary, the
chaperone, a very young married woman of twenty-two or thereabouts;
her husband, a youth of three years older, clean-shaven, light-haired,
quiet-mannered; Miss Elizabeth Carpenter, who resembled her brother
in the characteristics of good-looks, vivacious disposition and curly
hair; an attendant satellite of the masculine persuasion called
Morton; and last of all the girl whom Thorpe had already so variously
encountered and whom he now met as Miss Hilda Farrand.  Besides these
were Ginger, a squab negro built to fit the galley of a yacht; and
hree Indian guides.  They inhabited tents, which made quite a little
encampment.

Thorpe was received with enthusiasm.  Wallace Carpenter's stories of
his woods partner, while never doing more than justice to the truth,
had been of a warm color tone.  One and all owned a lively curiosity
to see what a real woodsman might be like.  When he proved to be
handsome and well mannered, as well as picturesque, his reception
was no longer in doubt.

Nothing could exceed his solicitude as to their comfort and amusement.
He inspected personally the arrangement of the tents, and suggested
one or two changes conducive to the littler comforts.  This was not
much like ordinary woods-camping.  The largest wall-tent contained
three folding cots for the women, over which, in the daytime, were
flung bright-colored Navajo blankets.  Another was spread on the
ground.  Thorpe later, however, sent over two bear skins, which were
acknowledgedly an improvement.  To the tent pole a mirror of size was
nailed, and below it stood a portable washstand.  The second tent,
devoted to the two men, was not quite so luxurious; but still boasted
of little conveniences the true woodsman would never consider worth
the bother of transporting.  The third, equally large, was the dining
tent.  The other three, smaller, and on the A tent order, served
respectively as sleeping rooms for Ginger and the Indians, and as a
general store-house for provisions and impedimenta.

Thorpe sent an Indian to Camp One for the bearskins, put the rest
to digging a trench around the sleeping tents in order that a rain
storm might not cause a flood, and ordered Ginger to excavate a
square hole some feet deep which he intended to utilize as a larder.

Then he gave Morton and Cary hints as to the deer they wished to
capture, pointed out the best trout pools, and issued advice as
to the compassing of certain blackberries, not far distant.

Simple things enough they were to do--it was as though a city man
were to direct a newcomer to Central Park, or impart to him a test
for the destinations of trolley lines--yet Thorpe's new friends were
profoundly impressed with his knowledge of occult things.  The forest
was to them, as to most, more or less of a mystery, unfathomable
except to the favored of genius.  A man who could interpret it,
even a little, into the speech of everyday comfort and expediency
possessed a strong claim to their imaginations.  When he had finished
these practical affairs, they wanted him to sit down and tell them
more things,to dine with them, to smoke about their camp fire in
the evening.  But here they encountered a decided check.  Thorpe
became silent, almost morose.  He talked in monosyllables, and soon
went away.  They did not know what to make of him, and so were, of
course, the more profoundly interested.  The truth was, his habitual
reticence would not have permitted a great degree of expansion in
any case, but now the presence of Hilda made any but an attitude of
hushed waiting for her words utterly impossible to him.  He wished
well to them all.  If there was anything he could do for them, he
would gladly undertake it.  But he would not act the lion nor tell
of his, to them, interesting adventures.

However, when he discovered that Hilda had ceased visiting the
clump of pines near the pole trail, his desire forced him back
among these people.  He used to walk in swiftly at almost any
time of day, casting quick glances here and there in search of
his divinity.

"How do, Mrs. Cary," he would say.  "Nice weather.  Enjoying
yourself?"

On receiving the reply he would answer heartily,  "That's good!"
and lapse into silence.  When Hilda was about he followed every
movement of hers with his eyes, so that his strange conduct lacked
no explanation nor interpretation, in the minds of the women at
least.  Thrice he redeemed his reputation for being an interesting
character by conducting the party on little expeditions here and
there about the country.  Then his woodcraft and resourcefulness
spoke for him.  They asked him about the lumbering operations, but
he seemed indifferent.

"Nothing to interest you," he affirmed.  "We're just cutting roads
now.  You ought to be here for the drive."

To him there was really nothing interesting in the cutting of roads
nor the clearing of streams.  It was all in a day's work.

Once he took them over to see Camp One.  They were immensely pleased,
and were correspondingly loud in exclamations.  Thorpe's comments
were brief and dry.  After the noon dinner he had the unfortunate
idea of commending the singing of one of the men.

"Oh, I'd like to hear him," cried Elizabeth Carpenter.  "Can't you
get him to sing for us, Mr. Thorpe?"

Thorpe went to the men's camp, where he singled out the unfortunate
lumber-jack in question.

"Come on, Archie," he said.  "The ladies want to hear you sing."

The man objected, refused, pleaded, and finally obeyed what
amounted to a command.  Thorpe reentered the office with triumph,
his victim in tow.

"This is Archie Harris," he announced heartily.  "He's our best
singer just now.  Take a chair, Archie."

The man perched on the edge of the chair and looked straight out
before him.

"Do sing for us, won't you, Mr. Harris?" requested Mrs. Cary in
her sweetest tones.

The man said nothing, nor moved a muscle, but turned a brick-red.
An embarrassed silence of expectation ensued.

"Hit her up, Archie," encouraged Thorpe.

"I ain't much in practice no how," objected the man in a little
voice, without moving.

"I'm sure you'll find us very appreciative," said Elizabeth
Carpenter.

"Give us a song, Archie, let her go," urged Thorpe impatiently.

"All right," replied the man very meekly.

Another silence fell.  It got to be a little awful.  The poor
woodsman, pilloried before the regards of this polite circle, out
of his element, suffering cruelly, nevertheless made no sign nor
movement one way or the other.  At last when the situation had
almost reached the breaking point of hysteria, he began.

His voice ordinarily was rather a good tenor.  Now he pitched it
too high; and went on straining at the high notes to the very end.
Instead of offering one of the typical woods chanteys, he conceived
that before so grand an audience he should give something fancy.  He
therefore struck into a sentimental song of the cheap music-hall type.
There were nine verses, and he drawled through them all, hanging
whiningly on the nasal notes in the fashion of the untrained singer.
Instead of being a performance typical of the strange woods genius, it
was merely an atrocious bit of cheap sentimentalism, badly rendered.

The audience listened politely.  When the song was finished it
murmured faint thanks.

"Oh, give us 'Jack Haggerty,' Archie," urged Thorpe.

But the woodsman rose, nodded his head awkwardly, and made his
escape.  He entered the men's camp, swearing, and for the remainder
of the day made none but blasphemous remarks.

The beagles, however, were a complete success.  They tumbled about,
and lolled their tongues, and laughed up out of a tangle of
themselves in a fascinating manner.  Altogether the visit to Camp
One was a success, the more so in that on the way back, for the
first time, Thorpe found that chance--and Mrs. Cary--had allotted
Hilda to his care.

A hundred yards down the trail they encountered Phil.  The dwarf
stopped short, looked attentively at the girl, and then softly
approached.  When quite near to her he again stopped, gazing at
her with his soul in his liquid eyes.

"You are more beautiful than the sea at night," he said directly.

The others laughed.  "There's sincerity for you, Miss Hilda," said
young Mr. Morton.

"Who is he?" asked the girl after they had moved

"Our chore-boy," answered Thorpe with great brevity, for he was
thinking of something much more important.

After the rest of the party had gone ahead, leaving them sauntering
more slowly down the trail, he gave it voice.

"Why don't you come to the pine grove any more?" he asked bluntly.

"Why?" countered Hilda in the manner of women.

"I want to see you there.  I want to talk with you.  I can't talk
with all that crowd around."

"I'll come to-morrow," she said--then with a little mischievous
laugh, "if that'll make you talk."

"You must think I'm awfully stupid," agreed Thorpe bitterly.

"Ah, no! Ah, no!" she protested softly.  "You must not say that."

She was looking at him very tenderly, if he had only known it, but
he did not, for his face was set in discontented lines straight
before him.

"It is true," he replied.

They walked on in silence, while gradually the dangerous fascination
of the woods crept down on them.  Just before sunset a hush falls
on nature.  The wind has died, the birds have not yet begun their
evening songs, the light itself seems to have left off sparkling and
to lie still across the landscape.  Such a hush now lay on their
spirits.  Over the way a creeper was droning sleepily a little chant,
--the only voice in the wilderness.  In the heart of the man, too,
a little voice raised itself alone.

"Sweetheart, sweetheart, sweetheart!" it breathed over and over
again.  After a while he said it gently in a half voice.

"No, no, hush!" said the girl, and she laid the soft, warm fingers
of one hand across his lips, and looked at him from a height of
superior soft-eyed tenderness as a woman might look at a child.
"You must not.  It is not right."

Then he kissed the fingers very gently before they were withdrawn,
and she said nothing at all in rebuke, but looked straight before
her with troubled eyes.

The voices of evening began to raise their jubilant notes.  From
a tree nearby the olive thrush sang like clockwork; over beyond
carolled eagerly a black-throat, a myrtle warbler, a dozen song
sparrows, and a hundred vireos and creepers.  Down deep in the
blackness of the ancient woods a hermit thrush uttered his solemn
bell note, like the tolling of the spirit of peace.  And in Thorpe's
heart a thousand tumultuous voices that had suddenly roused to
clamor, died into nothingness at the music of her softly protesting
voice.



Chapter XLII


Thorpe returned to Camp One shortly after dark.  He found there
Scotty Parsons, who had come up to take charge of the crew engaged
in clearing French Creek.  The man brought him a number of letters
sent on by Collins, among which was one from Wallace Carpenter.

After commending the camping party to his companion's care, and
giving minute directions as to how and where to meet it, the young
fellow went on to say that affairs were going badly on the Board.

"Some interest that I haven't been able to make out yet has been
hammering our stocks down day after day," he wrote.  "I don't
understand it, for the stocks are good--they rest on a solid
foundation of value and intrinsically are worth more than is bid
for them right now.  Some powerful concern is beating them down for
a purpose of its own.  Sooner or later they will let up, and then
we'll get things back in good shape.  I am amply protected now,
thanks to you, and am not at all afraid of losing my holdings.
The only difficulty is that I am unable to predict exactly when
the other fellows will decide that they have accomplished whatever
they are about, and let up.  It may not be before next year.  In
that case I couldn't help you out on those notes when they come due.
So put in your best licks, old man.  You may have to pony up for a
little while, though of course sooner or later I can put it all back.
Then, you bet your life, I keep out of it.  Lumbering's good enough
for yours truly.

"By the way, you might shine up to Hilda Farrand and join the rest
of the fortune-hunters.  She's got it to throw to the birds, and in
her own right.  Seriously, old fellow, don't put yourself into a
false position through ignorance.  Not that there is any danger to
a hardened old woodsman like you."

Thorpe went to the group of pines by the pole trail the following
afternoon because he had said he would, but with a new attitude of
mind.  He had come into contact with the artificiality of
conventional relations, and it stiffened him.  No wonder she had
made him keep silence the afternoon before!  She had done it gently
and nicely, to be sure, but that was part of her good-breeding.
Hilda found him formal, reserved, polite; and marvelled at it.  In
her was no coquetry.  She was as straightforward and sincere as the
look of her eyes.

They sat down on a log.  Hilda turned to him with her graceful air
of confidence.

"Now talk to me," said she.

"Certainly," replied Thorpe in a practical tone of voice, "what
do you want me to talk about?"

She shot a swift, troubled glance at him, concluded herself
mistaken, and said:

"Tell me about what you do up here--your life--all about it."

"Well--" replied Thorpe formally, "we haven't much to interest a
girl like you.  It is a question of saw logs with us"--and he went
on in his dryest, most technical manner to detail the process of
manufacture.  It might as well have been bricks.

The girl did not understand.  She was hurt.  As surely as the sun
tangled in the distant pine frond, she had seen in his eyes a great
passion.  Now it was coldly withdrawn.

"What has happened to you?" she asked finally out of her great
sincerity.

"Me?  Nothing," replied Thorpe.

A forced silence fell upon him.  Hilda seemed gradually to lose
herself in reverie.  After a time she said softly.

"Don't you love this woods?"

"It's an excellent bunch of pine," replied Thorpe bluntly.  "It'll
cut three million at least."

"Oh!" she cried drawing back, her hands pressed against the log
either side of her, her eyes wide.

After a moment she caught her breath convulsively, and Thorpe
became conscious that she was studying him furtively with a
quickening doubt.

After that, by the mercy of God, there was no more talk between
them.  She was too hurt and shocked and disillusioned to make the
necessary effort to go away.  He was too proud to put an end to the
position.  They sat there apparently absorbed in thought, while all
about them the accustomed life of the woods drew nearer and nearer
to them, as the splash of their entrance into it died away.

A red squirrel poised thirty feet above them, leaped, and clung
swaying to a sapling-top a dozen yards from the tree he had
quitted.  Two chickadees upside down uttering liquid undertones,
searched busily for insects next their heads.  Wilson's warblers,
pine creepers, black-throats, myrtle and magnolia warblers, oven
birds, peewits, blue jays, purple finches, passed silently or
noisily, each according to his kind.  Once a lone spruce hen dusted
herself in a stray patch of sunlight until it shimmered on a tree
trunk, raised upward, and disappeared, to give place to long level
dusty shafts that shot here and there through the pines laying the
spell of sunset on the noisy woods brawlers.

Unconsciously the first strain of opposition and of hurt surprise
had relaxed.  Each thought vaguely his thoughts.  Then in the depths
of the forest, perhaps near at hand, perhaps far away, a single
hermit thrush began to sing.  His song was of three solemn deep
liquid notes; followed by a slight rhetorical pause as of
contemplation; and then, deliberately, three notes more on a
different key--and so on without haste and without pause.  It is
the most dignified, the most spiritual, the holiest of woods
utterances.  Combined with the evening shadows and the warm soft
air, it offered to the heart an almost irresistible appeal.  The
man's artificial antagonism modified; the woman's disenchantment
began to seem unreal.

Then subtly over and through the bird-song another sound became
audible.  At first it merely repeated the three notes faintly, like
an echo, but with a rich, sad undertone that brought tears.  Then,
timidly and still softly, it elaborated the theme, weaving in and
out through the original three the glitter and shimmer of a
splendid web of sound, spreading before the awakened imagination
a broad river of woods-imagery that reflected on its surface all
the subtler moods of the forest.  The pine shadows, the calls of
the wild creatures, the flow of the brook, the splashes of sunlight
through the trees, the sigh of the wind, the shout of the rapid,--
all these were there, distinctly to be felt in their most ethereal
and beautiful forms.  And yet it was all slight and tenuous as
though the crack of a twig would break it through--so that over
it continually like a grand full organ-tone repeated the notes of
the bird itself.

With the first sigh of the wonder-music the girl had started and
caught her breath in the exquisite pleasure of it.  As it went on
they both forgot everything but the harmony and each other.

"Ah, beautiful!" she murmured.

"What is it?" he whispered marvelling.

"A violin,--played by a master."

The bird suddenly hushed, and at once the strain abandoned the
woods-note and took another motif.  At first it played softly
in the higher notes, a tinkling, lightsome little melody that
stirred a kindly surface-smile over a full heart.  Then suddenly,
without transition, it dropped to the lower register, and began
to sob and wail in the full vibrating power of a great passion.

And the theme it treated was love.  It spoke solemnly, fearfully of
the greatness of it, the glory.  These as abstractions it amplified
in fine full-breathed chords that swept the spirit up and up as on
the waves of a mighty organ.  Then one by one the voices of other
things were heard,--the tinkling of laughter, the roar of a city,
the sob of a grief, a cry of pain suddenly shooting across the
sound, the clank of a machine, the tumult of a river, the puff of a
steamboat, the murmuring of a vast crowd,--and one by one, without
seeming in the least to change their character, they merged
imperceptibly into, and were part of the grand-breathed chords,
so that at last all the fames and ambitions and passions of the
world came, in their apotheosis, to be only parts of the master-
passion of them all.

And while the echoes of the greater glory still swept beneath their
uplifted souls like ebbing waves, so that they still sat rigid and
staring with the majesty of it, the violin softly began to whisper.
Beautiful it was as a spirit, beautiful beyond words, beautiful
beyond thought.  Its beauty struck sharp at the heart.  And they two
sat there hand in hand dreaming--dreaming--dreaming---

At last the poignant ecstacy seemed slowly, slowly to die.  Fainter
and fainter ebbed the music.  Through it as through a mist the
solemn aloof forest began to show to the consciousness of the two.
They sought each other's eyes gently smiling.  The music was very
soft and dim and sad.  They leaned to each other with a sob.  Their
lips met.  The music ceased.

Alone in the forest side by side they looked out together for a
moment into that eternal vision which lovers only are permitted to
see.  The shadows fell.  About them brooded the inscrutable pines
stretching a canopy over them enthroned.  A single last shaft of
the sun struck full upon them, a single light-spot in the gathering
gloom.  They were beautiful.

And over behind the trees, out of the light and the love and the
beauty, little Phil huddled, his great shaggy head bowed in his
arms.  Beside him lay his violin, and beside that his bow, broken.
He had snapped it across his knee.  That day he had heard at last
the Heart Song of the Violin, and uttering it, had bestowed love.
But in accordance with his prophecy he had that day lost what he
cared for most in all the world, his friend.



Chapter XLIII


That was the moon of delight.  The days passed through the hazy
forest like stately figures from an old masque.  In the pine grove
on the knoll the man and the woman had erected a temple to love,
and love showed them one to the other.

In Hilda Farrand was no guile, no coquetry, no deceit.  So perfect
was her naturalism that often by those who knew her least she was
considered affected.  Her trust in whomever she found herself with
attained so directly its reward; her unconsciousness of pose was so
rhythmically graceful; her ignorance and innocence so triumphantly
effective, that the mind with difficulty rid itself of the belief
that it was all carefully studied.  This was not true.  She honestly
did not know that she was beautiful; was unaware of her grace; did
not realize the potency of her wealth.

This absolute lack of self-consciousness was most potent in overcoming
Thorpe's natural reticence.  He expanded to her.  She came to idolize
him in a manner at once inspiring and touching in so beautiful a
creature.  In him she saw reflected all the lofty attractions of
character which she herself possessed, but of which she was entirely
unaware.  Through his words she saw to an ideal.  His most trivial
actions were ascribed to motives of a dignity which would have been
ridiculous, if it had not been a little pathetic.  The woods-life,
the striving of the pioneer kindled her imagination.  She seized upon
the great facts of them and fitted those facts with reasons of her
own.  Her insight perceived the adventurous spirit, the battle-
courage, the indomitable steadfastness which always in reality lie
back of these men of the frontier to urge them into the life; and
of them constructed conscious motives of conduct.  To her fancy the
lumbermen, of whom Thorpe was one, were self-conscious agents of
advance.  They chose hardship, loneliness, the strenuous life
because they wished to clear the way for a higher civilization.  To
her it seemed a great and noble sacrifice.  She did not perceive
that while all this is true, it is under the surface, the real spur
is a desire to get on, and a hope of making money.  For, strangely
enough, she differentiated sharply the life and the reasons for it.
An existence in subduing the forest was to her ideal; the making of
a fortune through a lumbering firm she did not consider in the
least important.  That this distinction was most potent, the sequel
will show.

In all of it she was absolutely sincere, and not at all stupid.  She
had always had all she could spend, without question.  Money meant
nothing to her, one way or the other.  If need was, she might have
experienced some difficulty in learning how to economize, but none
at all in adjusting herself to the necessity of it.  The material
had become, in all sincerity, a basis for the spiritual.  She
recognized but two sorts of motives; of which the ideal, comprising
the poetic, the daring, the beautiful, were good; and the material,
meaning the sordid and selfish, were bad.  With her the mere money-
getting would have to be allied with some great and poetic excuse.

That is the only sort of aristocracy, in the popular sense of the
word, which is real; the only scorn of money which can be respected.

There are some faces which symbolize to the beholder many subtleties
of soul-beauty which by no other method could gain expression.  Those
subtleties may not, probably do not, exist in the possessor of the
face.  The power of such a countenance lies not so much in what it
actually represents, as in the suggestion it holds out to another.
So often it is with a beautiful character.  Analyze it carefully,
and you will reduce it generally to absolute simplicity and absolute
purity--two elements common enough in adulteration; but place it
face to face with a more complex personality, and mirror-like it
will take on a hundred delicate shades of ethical beauty, while at
the same time preserving its own lofty spirituality.

Thus Hilda Farrand reflected Thorpe.  In the clear mirror of her
heart his image rested transfigured.  It was as though the glass
were magic, so that the gross and material was absorbed and lost,
while the more spiritual qualities reflected back.  So the image was
retained in its entirety, but etherealized, refined.  It is necessary
to attempt, even thus faintly and inadequately, a sketch of Hilda's
love, for a partial understanding of it is necessary to the
comprehension of what followed the moon of delight.

That moon saw a variety of changes.

The bed of French Creek was cleared.  Three of the roads were
finished, and the last begun.  So much for the work of it.

Morton and Cary shot four deer between them, which was unpardonably
against the law, caught fish in plenty, smoked two and a half pounds
of tobacco, and read half of one novel.  Mrs. Cary and Miss Carpenter
walked a total of over a hundred miles, bought twelve pounds of
Indian work of all sorts, embroidered the circle of two embroidery
frames, learned to paddle a birch-bark canoe, picked fifteen quarts
of berries, and gained six pounds in weight.  All the party together
accomplished five picnics, four explorations, and thirty excellent
campfires in the evening.  So much for the fun of it.

Little Phil disappeared utterly, taking with him his violin, but
leaving his broken bow.  Thorpe has it even to this day.  The
lumberman caused search and inquiry on all sides.  The cripple was
never heard of again.  He had lived his brief hour, taken his subtle
artist's vengeance of misplayed notes on the crude appreciation of
men too coarse-fibered to recognize it, brought together by the
might of sacrifice and consummate genius two hearts on the brink
of misunderstanding;--now there was no further need for him, he had
gone.  So much for the tragedy of it.

"I saw you long ago," said Hilda to Thorpe.  "Long, long ago, when
I was quite a young girl.  I had been visiting in Detroit, and was
on my way all alone to catch an early train.  You stood on the corner
thinking, tall and straight and brown, with a weather-beaten old hat
and a weather-beaten old coat and weather-beaten old moccasins, and
such a proud, clear, undaunted look on your face.  I have remembered
you ever since."

And then he told her of the race to the Land Office, while her eyes
grew brighter and brighter with the epic splendor of the story.  She
told him that she had loved him from that moment--and believed her
telling; while he, the unsentimental leader of men, persuaded himself
and her that he had always in some mysterious manner carried her image
prophetically in his heart.  So much for the love of it.

In the last days of the month of delight Thorpe received a second
letter from his partner, which to some extent awakened him to the
realities.

"My dear Harry," it ran.  "I have made a startling discovery.
The other fellow is Morrison.  I have been a blind, stupid dolt,
and am caught nicely.  You can't call me any more names than I
have already called myself.  Morrison has been in it from the start.
By an accident I learned he was behind the fellow who induced me
to invest, and it is he who has been hammering the stock down ever
since.  They couldn't lick you at your game, so they tackled me
at mine.  I'm not the man you are, Harry, and I've made a mess of
it.  Of course their scheme is plain enough on the face of it.
They're going to involve me so deeply that I will drag the firm
down with me.

"If you can fix it to meet those notes, they can't do it.  I have
ample margin to cover any more declines they may be able to bring
about.  Don't fret about that.  Just as sure as you can pay that
sixty thousand, just so sure we'll be ahead of the game at this
time next year.  For God's sake get a move on you, old man.  If you
don't--good Lord!  The firm'll bust because she can't pay; I'll bust
because I'll have to let my stock go on margins--it'll be an awful
smash.  But you'll get there, so we needn't worry.  I've been an
awful fool, and I've no right to do the getting into trouble and
leave you to the hard work of getting out again.  But as partner
I'm going to insist on your having a salary--etc."

The news aroused all Thorpe's martial spirit.  Now at last the
mystery surrounding Morrison & Daly's unnatural complaisance was
riven.  It had come to grapples again.  He was glad of it.  Meet
those notes?  Well I guess so!  He'd show them what sort of a
proposition they had tackled.  Sneaking, underhanded scoundrels!
taking advantage of a mere boy.  Meet those notes?  You bet he
would; and then he'd go down there and boost those stocks until M.
& D. looked like a last year's bird's nest.  He thrust the letter
in his pocket and walked buoyantly to the pines.

The two lovers sat there all the afternoon drinking in half sadly
the joy of the forest and of being near each other, for the moon
of delight was almost done.  In a week the camping party would be
breaking up, and Hilda must return to the city.  It was uncertain
when they would be able to see each other again, though there was
talk of getting up a winter party to visit Camp One in January.
The affair would be unique.

Suddenly the girl broke off and put her fingers to her lips.  For
some time, dimly, an intermittent and faint sound had been felt,
rather than actually heard, like the irregular muffled beating of
a heart.  Gradually it had insisted on the attention.  Now at last
it broke through the film of consciousness.

"What is it?" she asked.

Thorpe listened.  Then his face lit mightily with the joy of battle.

"My axmen," he cried.  "They are cutting the road."

A faint call echoed.  Then without warning, nearer at hand the sharp
ring of an ax sounded through the forest.






PART IV


THE FOLLOWING OF THE TRAIL



Chapter XLIV


For a moment they sat listening to the clear staccato knocking of
the distant blows, and the more forceful thuds of the man nearer at
hand.  A bird or so darted from the direction of the sound and shot
silently into the thicket behind them.

"What are they doing?  Are they cutting lumber?" asked Hilda.

"No," answered Thorpe, "we do not cut saw logs at this time of year.
They are clearing out a road."

"Where does it go to?"

"Well, nowhere in particular.  That is, it is a logging road that
starts at the river and wanders up through the woods where the pine
is."

"How clear the axes sound.  Can't we go down and watch them a little
while?"

"The main gang is a long distance away; sound carries very clearly
in this still air.  As for that fellow you hear so plainly, he is
only clearing out small stuff to get ready for the others.  You
wouldn't see anything different from your Indian chopping the
cordwood for your camp fire.  He won't chop out any big trees."

"Let's not go, then," said Hilda submissively.

"When you come up in the winter," he pursued, "you will see any
amount of big timber felled."

"I would like to know more about it," she sighed, a quaint little
air of childish petulance graving two lines between her eyebrows.
"Do you know, Harry, you are a singularly uncommunicative sort of
being.  I have to guess that your life is interesting and picturesque,
--that is," she amended, "I should have to do so if Wallace Carpenter
had not told me a little something about it.  Sometimes I think you
are not nearly poet enough for the life you are living.  Why, you are
wonderful, you men of the north, and you let us ordinary mortals who
have not the gift of divination imagine you entirely occupied with
how many pounds of iron chain you are going to need during the
winter."  She said these things lightly as one who speaks things
not for serious belief.

"It is something that way," he agreed with a laugh.

"Do you know, sir," she persisted, "that I really don't know
anything at all about the life you lead here?  From what I have
seen, you might be perpetually occupied in eating things in a log
cabin, and in disappearing to perform some mysterious rites in the
forest."  She looked at him with a smiling mouth but tender eyes,
her head tilted back slightly.

"It's a good deal that way, too," he agreed again.  "We use a
barrel of flour in Camp One every two and a half days!"

She shook her head in a faint negation that only half understood
what he was saying, her whole heart in her tender gaze.

"Sit there," she breathed very softly, pointing to the dried needles
on which her feet rested, but without altering the position of her
head or the steadfastness of her look.

He obeyed.

"Now tell me," she breathed, still in the fascinated monotone.

"What?" he inquired.

"Your life; what you do; all about it.  You must tell me a story."

Thorpe settled himself more lazily, and laughed with quiet enjoyment.
Never had he felt the expansion of a similar mood.  The barrier
between himself and self-expression had faded, leaving not the
smallest debris of the old stubborn feeling.

"The story of the woods," he began, "the story of the saw log.  It
would take a bigger man than I to tell it.  I doubt if any one man
ever would be big enough.  It is a drama, a struggle, a battle.
Those men you hear there are only the skirmishers extending the
firing line.  We are fighting always with Time.  I'll have to hurry
now to get those roads done and a certain creek cleared before the
snow.  Then we'll have to keep on the keen move to finish our
cutting before the deep snow; to haul our logs before the spring
thaws; to float them down the river while the freshet water lasts.
When we gain a day we have scored a victory; when the wilderness
puts us back an hour, we have suffered a defeat.  Our ammunition
is Time; our small shot the minutes, our heavy ordnance the hours!"

The girl placed her hand on his shoulder.  He covered it with his
own.

"But we win!" he cried.  "We win!"

"That is what I like," she said softly, "the strong spirit that
wins!"  She hesitated, then went on gently, "But the battlefields,
Harry; to me they are dreadful.  I went walking yesterday morning,
before you came over, and after a while I found myself in the most
awful place.  The stumps of trees, the dead branches, the trunks
lying all about, and the glaring hot sun over everything!  Harry,
there was not a single bird in all that waste, a single green thing.
You don't know how it affected me so early in the morning.  I saw
just one lonesome pine tree that had been left for some reason or
another, standing there like a sentinel.  I could shut my eyes and
see all the others standing, and almost hear the birds singing and
the wind in the branches, just as it is here."  She seized his
fingers in her other hand.  "Harry," she said earnestly, "I don't
believe I can ever forget that experience, any more than I could
have forgotten a battlefield, were I to see one.  I can shut my eyes
now, and can see this place our dear little wooded knoll wasted and
blackened as that was."

The man twisted his shoulder uneasily and withdrew his hand.

"Harry," she said again, after a pause, "you must promise to leave
this woods until the very last.  I suppose it must all be cut down
some day, but I do not want to be here to see after it is all over."

Thorpe remained silent.

"Men do not care much for keepsakes, do they, Harry?--they don't
save letters and flowers as we girls do--but even a man can feel the
value of a great beautiful keepsake such as this, can't he, dear?
Our meeting-place--do you remember how I found you down there by the
old pole trail, staring as though you had seen a ghost?--and that
beautiful, beautiful music!  It must always be our most sacred
memory.  Promise me you will save it until the very, very last."

Thorpe said nothing because he could not rally his faculties.  The
sentimental association connected with the grove had actually never
occurred to him.  His keepsakes were impressions which he carefully
guarded in his memory.  To the natural masculine indifference toward
material bits of sentiment he had added the instinct of the strictly
portable early developed in the rover.  He had never even possessed a
photograph of his sister.  Now this sudden discovery that such things
might be part of the woof of another person's spiritual garment came
to him ready-grown to the proportions of a problem.

In selecting the districts for the season's cut, he had included in
his estimates this very grove.  Since then he had seen no reason for
changing his decision.  The operations would not commence until
winter.  By that time the lovers would no longer care to use it as
at present.  Now rapidly he passed in review a dozen expedients by
which his plan might be modified to permit of the grove's exclusion.
His practical mind discovered flaws in every one.  Other bodies of
timber promising a return of ten thousand dollars were not to be
found near the river, and time now lacked for the cutting of roads
to more distant forties.

"Hilda," he broke in abruptly at last, "the men you hear are clearing
a road to this very timber."

"What do you mean?" she asked.

"This timber is marked for cutting this very winter."

She had not a suspicion of the true state of affairs.  "Isn't it
lucky I spoke of it!" she exclaimed.  "How could you have forgotten
to countermand the order!  You must see to it to-day; now!"

She sprang up impulsively and stood waiting for him.  He arose more
slowly.  Even before he spoke her eyes dilated with the shock from
her quick intuitions.

"Hilda, I cannot," he said.

She stood very still for some seconds.

"Why not?" she asked quietly.

"Because I have not time to cut a road through to another bunch of
pine.  It is this or nothing."

"Why not nothing, then?"

"I want the money this will bring."

His choice of a verb was unfortunate.  The employment of that one
little word opened the girl's mind to a flood of old suspicions
which the frank charm of the northland had thrust outside.  Hilda
Farrand was an heiress and a beautiful girl.  She had been constantly
reminded of the one fact by the attempts of men to use flattery of
the other as a key to her heart and her fortune.  From early girlhood
she had been sought by the brilliant impecunious of two continents.
The continued experience had varnished her self-esteem with a glaze
of cynicism sufficiently consistent to protect it against any but
the strongest attack.  She believed in no man's protestations.  She
distrusted every man's motives as far as herself was concerned.  This
attitude of mind was not unbecoming in her for the simple reason that
it destroyed none of her graciousness as regards other human relations
besides that of love.  That men should seek her in matrimony from a
selfish motive was as much to be expected as that flies should seek
the sugar bowl.  She accepted the fact as one of nature's laws,
annoying enough but inevitable; a thing to guard against, but not
one of sufficient moment to grieve over.

With Thorpe, however, her suspicions had been lulled.  There is
something virile and genuine about the woods and the men who
inhabit them that strongly predisposes the mind to accept as proved
in their entirety all the other virtues.  Hilda had fallen into this
state of mind.  She endowed each of the men whom she encountered
with all the robust qualities she had no difficulty in recognizing
as part of nature's charm in the wilderness.  Now at a word her eyes
were opened to what she had done.  She saw that she had assumed
unquestioningly that her lover possessed the qualities of his
environment.

Not for a moment did she doubt the reality of her love.  She had
conceived one of those deep, uplifting passions possible only to a
young girl.  But her cynical experience warned her that the reality
of that passion's object was not proven by any test besides the
fallible one of her own poetizing imagination.  The reality of the
ideal she had constructed might be a vanishable quantity even though
the love of it was not.  So to the interview that ensued she brought,
not the partiality of a loving heart, nor even the impartiality of
one sitting in judgment, but rather the perverted prejudice of one
who actually fears the truth.

"Will you tell me for what you want the money?" she asked.

The young man caught the note of distrust.  At once, instinctively,
his own confidence vanished.  He drew within himself, again beyond
the power of justifying himself with the needed word.

"The firm needs it in the business," said he.

Her next question countered instantaneously.

"Does the firm need the money more than you do me?"

They stared at each other in the silence of the situation that had
so suddenly developed.  It had come into being without their volition,
as a dust cloud springs up on a plain.

"You do not mean that, Hilda," said Thorpe quietly.  "It hardly
comes to that."

"Indeed it does," she replied, every nerve of her fine organization
strung to excitement.  "I should be more to you than any firm."

"Sometimes it is necessary to look after the bread and butter,"
Thorpe reminded her gently, although he knew that was not the real
reason at all.

"If your firm can't supply it, I can," she answered.  "It seems
strange that you won't grant my first request of you, merely
because of a little money."

"It isn't a little money," he objected, catching manlike at the
practical question.  "You don't realize what an amount a clump of
pine like this stands for.  Just in saw logs, before it is made into
lumber, it will be worth about thirty thousand dollars,--of course
there's the expense of logging to pay out of that," he added, out
of his accurate business conservatism, "but there's ten thousand
dollars' profit in it."

The girl, exasperated by cold details at such a time, blazed out.
"I never heard anything so ridiculous in my life!" she cried.
"Either you are not at all the man I thought you, or you have some
better reason than you have given.  Tell me, Harry; tell me at once.
You don't know what you are doing."

"The firm needs it, Hilda," said Thorpe, "in order to succeed.  If
we do not cut this pine, we may fail."

In that he stated his religion.  The duty of success was to him one
of the loftiest of abstractions, for it measured the degree of a
man's efficiency in the station to which God had called him.  The
money, as such, was nothing to him.

Unfortunately the girl had learned a different language.  She knew
nothing of the hardships, the struggles, the delight of winning for
the sake of victory rather than the sake of spoils.  To her, success
meant getting a lot of money.  The name by which Thorpe labelled his
most sacred principle, to her represented something base and sordid.
She had more money herself than she knew.  It hurt her to the soul
that the condition of a small money-making machine, as she considered
the lumber firm, should be weighed even for an instant against her
love.  It was a great deal Thorpe's fault that she so saw the firm.
He might easily have shown her the great forces and principles for
which it stood.

"If I were a man," she said, and her voice was tense, "if I were
a man and loved a woman, I would be ready to give up everything for
her.  My riches, my pride, my life, my honor, my soul even,--they
would be as nothing, as less than nothing to me,--if I loved.  Harry,
don't let me think I am mistaken.  Let this miserable firm of yours
fail, if fail it must for lack of my poor little temple of dreams,"
she held out her hands with a tender gesture of appeal.  The affair
had gone beyond the preservation of a few trees.  It had become the
question of an ideal.  Gradually, in spite of herself, the conviction
was forcing itself upon her that the man she had loved was no
different from the rest; that the greed of the dollar had corrupted
him too.  By the mere yielding to her wishes, she wanted to prove the
suspicion wrong.

Now the strange part of the whole situation was, that in two words
Thorpe could have cleared it.  If he had explained that he needed
the ten thousand dollars to help pay a note given to save from ruin
a foolish friend, he would have supplied to the affair just the
higher motive the girl's clear spirituality demanded.  Then she
would have shared enthusiastically in the sacrifice, and been the
more loving and repentant from her momentary doubt.  All she needed
was that the man should prove himself actuated by a noble, instead
of a sordid, motive.  The young man did not say the two words,
because in all honesty he thought them unimportant.  It seemed to
him quite natural that he should go on Wallace Carpenter's note.
That fact altered not a bit the main necessity of success.  It was
a man's duty to make the best of himself,--it was Thorpe's duty to
prove himself supremely efficient in his chosen calling; the mere
coincidence that his partner's troubles worked along the same lines
meant nothing to the logic of the situation.  In stating baldly that
he needed the money to assure the firm's existence, he imagined he
had adduced the strongest possible reason for his attitude.  If the
girl was not influenced by that, the case was hopeless.

It was the difference of training rather than the difference of
ideas.  Both clung to unselfishness as the highest reason for human
action; but each expressed the thought in a manner incomprehensible
to the other.

"I cannot, Hilda," he answered steadily.

"You sell me for ten thousand dollars!  I cannot believe it!  Harry!
Harry!  Must I put it to you as a choice?  Don't you love me enough
to spare me that?"

He did not reply.  As long as it remained a dilemma, he would not
reply.  He was in the right.

"Do you need the money more than you do me? more than you do love?"
she begged, her soul in her eyes; for she was begging also for
herself.  "Think, Harry; it is the last chance!"

Once more he was face to face with a vital decision.  To his
surprise he discovered in his mind no doubt as to what the answer
should be.  He experienced no conflict of mind; no hesitation;
for the moment, no regret.  During all his woods life he had been
following diligently the trail he had blazed for his conduct.  Now
his feet carried him unconsciously to the same end.  There was no
other way out.  In the winter of his trouble the clipped trees alone
guided him, and at the end of them he found his decision.  It is
in crises of this sort, when a little reflection or consideration
would do wonders to prevent a catastrophe, that all the forgotten
deeds, decisions, principles, and thoughts of a man's past life
combine solidly into the walls of fatality, so that in spite of
himself he finds he must act in accordance with them.  In answer
to Hilda's question he merely inclined his head.

"I have seen a vision," said she simply, and lowered her head to
conceal her eyes.  Then she looked at him again.  "There can be
nothing better than love," she said.

"Yes, one thing," said Thorpe, "the duty of success."

The man had stated his creed; the woman hers.  The one is born
perfect enough for love; the other must work, must attain the
completeness of a fulfilled function, must succeed, to deserve it.

She left him then, and did not see him again.  Four days later the
camping party left.  Thorpe sent Tim Shearer over, as his most
efficient man, to see that they got off without difficulty, but
himself retired on some excuse to Camp Four.  Three weeks gone in
October he received a marked newspaper announcing the engagement
of Miss Hilda Farrand to Mr. Hildreth Morton of Chicago.

He had burned his ships, and stood now on an unfriendly shore.  The
first sacrifice to his jealous god had been consummated, and now,
live or die, he stood pledged to win his fight.



Chapter XLV


Winter set in early and continued late; which in the end was
a good thing for the year's cut.  The season was capricious,
hanging for days at a time at the brink of a thaw, only to stiffen
again into severe weather.  This was trying on the nerves.  For at
each of these false alarms the six camps fell into a feverish haste
to get the job finished before the break-up.  It was really quite
extraordinary how much was accomplished under the nagging spur of
weather conditions and the cruel rowelling of Thorpe.

The latter had now no thought beyond his work, and that was the
thought of a madman.  He had been stern and unyielding enough
before, goodness knows, but now he was terrible.  His restless
energy permeated every molecule in the economic structure over
which he presided, roused it to intense vibration.  Not for an
instant was there a resting spell.  The veriest chore-boy talked,
thought, dreamed of nothing but saw logs.  Men whispered vaguely
of a record cut.  Teamsters looked upon their success or failure
to keep near the top on the day's haul as a signal victory or a
disgraceful defeat.  The difficulties of snow, accident, topography
which an ever-watchful nature threw down before the rolling car of
this industry, were swept aside like straws.  Little time was wasted
and no opportunities.  It did not matter how smoothly affairs
happened to be running for the moment, every advantage, even the
smallest, was eagerly seized to advance the work.  A drop of five
degrees during the frequent warm spells brought out the sprinklers,
even in dead of night; an accident was white-hot in the forge
almost before the crack of the iron had ceased to echo.  At night
the men fell into their bunks like sandbags, and their last conscious
thought, if indeed they had any at all, was of eagerness for the
morrow in order that they might push the grand total up another
notch.  It was madness; but it was the madness these men loved.

For now to his old religion Thorpe had added a fanaticism, and over
the fanaticism was gradually creeping a film of doubt.  To the
conscientious energy which a sense of duty supplied, was added the
tremendous kinetic force of a love turned into other channels.  And
in the wild nights while the other men slept, Thorpe's half-crazed
brain was revolving over and over again the words of the sentence
he had heard from Hilda's lips: "There can be nothing better than
love."

His actions, his mind, his very soul vehemently denied the
proposition.
He clung as ever to his high Puritanic idea of man's purpose.  But
down deep in a very tiny, sacred corner of his heart a very small
voice sometimes made itself heard when other, more militant voices
were still: "It may be; it may be!"

The influence of this voice was practically nothing.  It made
itself heard occasionally.  Perhaps even, for the time being, its
weight counted on the other side of the scale; for Thorpe took
pains to deny it fiercely, both directly and indirectly by increased
exertions.  But it persisted; and once in a moon or so, when the
conditions were quite favorable, it attained for an instant a shred
of belief.

Probably never since the Puritan days of New England has a community
lived as sternly as did that winter of 1888 the six camps under
Thorpe's management.  There was something a little inspiring about
it.  The men fronted their daily work with the same grim-faced,
clear-eyed steadiness of veterans going into battle;--with the
same confidence, the same sure patience that disposes effectively
of one thing before going on to the next.  There was little merely
excitable bustle; there was no rest.  Nothing could stand against
such a spirit.  Nothing did.  The skirmishers which the wilderness
threw out, were brushed away.  Even the inevitable delays seemed
not so much stoppages as the instant's pause of a heavy vehicle in
a snow drift, succeeded by the momentary acceleration as the plunge
carried it through.  In the main, and by large, the machine moved
steadily and inexorably.

And yet one possessed of the finer spiritual intuitions could not
have shaken off the belief in an impending struggle.  The feel of it
was in the air.  Nature's forces were too mighty to be so slightly
overcome; the splendid energy developed in these camps too vast to
be wasted on facile success.  Over against each other were two great
powers, alike in their calm confidence, animated with the loftiest
and most dignified spirit of enmity.  Slowly they were moving toward
each other.  The air was surcharged with the electricity of their
opposition.  Just how the struggle would begin was uncertain; but its
inevitability was as assured as its magnitude.  Thorpe knew it, and
shut his teeth, looking keenly about him.  The Fighting Forty knew
it, and longed for the grapple to come.  The other camps knew it,
and followed their leader with perfect trust.  The affair was an
epitome of the historic combats begun with David and Goliath.  It
was an affair of Titans.  The little courageous men watched their
enemy with cat's eyes.

The last month of hauling was also one of snow.  In this condition
were few severe storms, but each day a little fell.  By and by the
accumulation amounted to much.  In the woods where the wind could
not get at it, it lay deep and soft above the tops of bushes.  The
grouse ate browse from the slender hardwood tips like a lot of
goldfinches, or precipitated themselves headlong down through five
feet of snow to reach the ground.  Often Thorpe would come across
the irregular holes of their entrance.  Then if he took the trouble
to stamp about a little in the vicinity with his snowshoes, the
bird would spring unexpectedly from the clear snow, scattering a
cloud with its strong wings.  The deer, herded together, tramped
"yards" where the feed was good.  Between the yards ran narrow
trails.  When the animals went from one yard to another in these
trails, their ears and antlers alone were visible.  On either side
of the logging roads the snow piled so high as to form a kind of
rampart.  When all this water in suspense should begin to flow,
and to seek its level in the water-courses of the district, the
logs would have plenty to float them, at least.

So late did the cold weather last that, even with the added plowing
to do, the six camps beat all records.  On the banks at Camp One
were nine million feet; the totals of all five amounted to thirty-
three million.  About ten million of this was on French Creek; the
remainder on the main banks of the Ossawinamakee.  Besides this the
firm up-river, Sadler & Smith, had put up some twelve million more.
The drive promised to be quite an affair.

About the fifteenth of April attention became strained.  Every day
the mounting sun made heavy attacks on the snow: every night the
temperature dropped below the freezing point.  The river began to
show more air holes, occasional open places.  About the center the
ice looked worn and soggy.  Someone saw a flock of geese high in
the air.  Then came rain.

One morning early, Long Pine Jim came into the men's camp bearing a
huge chunk of tallow.  This he held against the hot stove until its
surface had softened, when he began to swab liberal quantities of
grease on his spiked river shoes, which he fished out from under
his bunk.

"She's comin', boys," said he.

He donned a pair of woolen trousers that had been chopped off at
the knee, thick woolen stockings, and the river shoes.  Then he
tightened his broad leather belt about his heavy shirt, cocked his
little hat over his ear, and walked over in the corner to select a
peavey from the lot the blacksmith had just put in shape.  A peavey
is like a cant-hook except that it is pointed at the end.  Thus it
can be used either as a hook or a pike.  At the same moment Shearer,
similarly attired and equipped, appeared in the doorway.  The opening
of the portal admitted a roar of sound.  The river was rising.

"Come on, boys, she's on!" said he sharply.

Outside, the cook and cookee were stowing articles in the already
loaded wanigan.  The scow contained tents, blankets, provisions, and
a portable stove.  It followed the drive, and made a camp wherever
expediency demanded.

"Lively, boys, lively!" shouted Thorpe.  "She'll be down on us
before we know it!"

Above the soft creaking of dead branches in the wind sounded a
steady roar, like the bellowing of a wild beast lashing itself to
fury.  The freshet was abroad, forceful with the strength of a
whole winter's accumulated energy.

The men heard it and their eyes brightened with the lust of battle.
They cheered.



Chapter XLVI


At the banks of the river, Thorpe rapidly issued his directions.
The affair had been all prearranged.  During the week previous he
and his foremen had reviewed the situation, examining the state of
the ice, the heads of water in the three dams.  Immediately above
the first rollways was Dam Three with its two wide sluices through
which a veritable flood could be loosened at will; then four miles
farther lay the rollways of Sadler & Smith, the up-river firm; and
above them tumbled over a forty-five foot ledge the beautiful Siscoe
Falls; these first rollways of Thorpe's--spread in the broad marsh
flat below the dam--contained about eight millions; the rest of
the season's cut was scattered for thirty miles along the bed of
the river.

Already the ice cementing the logs together had begun to weaken.
The ice had wrenched and tugged savagely at the locked timbers
until they had, with a mighty effort, snapped asunder the bonds of
their hibernation.  Now a narrow lane of black rushing water pierced
the rollways, to boil and eddy in the consequent jam three miles
below.

To the foremen Thorpe assigned their tasks, calling them to him one
by one, as a general calls his aids.

"Moloney," said he to the big Irishman, "take your crew and break
that jam.  Then scatter your men down to within a mile of the pond
at Dam Two, and see that the river runs clear.  You can tent for a
day or so at West Bend or some other point about half way down; and
after that you had better camp at the dam.  Just as soon as you get
logs enough in the pond, start to sluicing them through the dam.
You won't need more than four men there, if you keep a good head.
You can keep your gates open five or six hours.  And Moloney."

"Yes, sir."

"I want you to be careful not to sluice too long.  There is a bar
just below the dam, and if you try to sluice with the water too
low, you'll center and jam there, as sure as shooting."

Bryan Moloney turned on his heel and began to pick his way down
stream over the solidly banked logs.  Without waiting the command,
a dozen men followed him.  The little group bobbed away irregularly
into the distance, springing lightly from one timber to the other,
holding their quaintly-fashioned peaveys in the manner of a rope
dancer's balancing pole.  At the lowermost limit of the rollways,
each man pried a log into the water, and, standing gracefully erect
on this unstable craft, floated out down the current to the scene
of his dangerous labor.

"Kerlie," went on Thorpe, "your crew can break rollways with the
rest until we get the river fairly filled, and then you can move
on down stream as fast as you are needed.  Scotty, you will have
the rear.  Tim and I will boss the river."

At once the signal was given to Ellis, the dam watcher.  Ellis and
his assistants thereupon began to pry with long iron bars at the
ratchets of the heavy gates.  The chore-boy bent attentively over
the ratchet-pin, lifting it delicately to permit another inch of
raise, dropping it accurately to enable the men at the bars to
seize a fresh purchase.  The river's roar deepened.  Through the
wide sluice-ways a torrent foamed and tumbled.  Immediately it spread
through the brush on either side to the limits of the freshet banks,
and then gathered for its leap against the uneasy rollways.  Along
the edge of the dark channel the face of the logs seemed to crumble
away.  Farther in towards the banks where the weight of timber still
outbalanced the weight of the flood, the tiers grumbled and stirred,
restless with the stream's calling.  Far down the river, where Bryan
Moloney and his crew were picking at the jam, the water in eager
streamlets sought the interstices between the logs, gurgling
excitedly like a mountain brook.

The jam creaked and groaned in response to the pressure.  From its
face a hundred jets of water spurted into the lower stream.  Logs
up-ended here and there, rising from the bristling surface slowly,
like so many arms from lower depths.  Above, the water eddied back
foaming; logs shot down from the rollways, paused at the slackwater,
and finally hit with a hollow and resounding BOOM! against the tail
of the jam.  A moment later they too up-ended, so becoming an integral
part of the "chevaux de frise."

The crew were working desperately.  Down in the heap somewhere, two
logs were crossed in such a manner as to lock the whole.  They
sought those logs.

Thirty feet above the bed of the river six men clamped their peaveys
into the soft pine; jerking, pulling, lifting, sliding the great logs
from their places.  Thirty feet below, under the threatening face, six
other men coolly picked out and set adrift, one by one, the timbers
not inextricably imbedded.  From time to time the mass creaked,
settled, perhaps even moved a foot or two; but always the practiced
rivermen, after a glance, bent more eagerly to their work.

Outlined against the sky, big Bryan Moloney stood directing the
work.  He had gone at the job on the bias of indirection, picking
out a passage at either side that the center might the more easily
"pull."  He knew by the tenseness of the log he stood on that,
behind the jam, power had gathered sufficient to push the whole
tangle down-stream.  Now he was offering it the chance.

Suddenly the six men below the jam scattered.  Four of them, holding
their peaveys across their bodies, jumped lightly from one floating
log to another in the zigzag to shore.  When they stepped on a small
log they re-leaped immediately, leaving a swirl of foam where the
little timber had sunk under them; when they encountered one larger,
they hesitated for a barely perceptible instant.  Thus their
progression was of fascinating and graceful irregularity.  The other
two ran the length of their footing, and, overleaping an open of
water, landed heavily and firmly on the very ends of two small
floating logs.  In this manner the force of the jump rushed the
little timbers end-on through the water.  The two men, maintaining
marvellously their balance, were thus ferried to within leaping
distance of the other shore.

In the meantime a barely perceptible motion was communicating
itself from one particle to another through the center of the jam.
A cool and observant spectator might have imagined that the broad
timber carpet was changing a little its pattern, just as the earth
near the windows of an arrested railroad train seems for a moment
to retrogress.  The crew redoubled its exertions, clamping its
peaveys here and there, apparently at random, but in reality with
the most definite of purposes.  A sharp crack exploded immediately
underneath.  There could no longer exist any doubt as to the motion,
although it was as yet sluggish, glacial.  Then in silence a log
shifted--in silence and slowly--but with irresistible force.  Jimmy
Powers quietly stepped over it, just as it menaced his leg.  Other
logs in all directions up-ended.  The jam crew were forced continually
to alter their positions, riding the changing timbers bent-kneed, as
a circus rider treads his four galloping horses.

Then all at once down by the face something crashed.  The entire
stream became alive.  It hissed and roared, it shrieked, groaned and
grumbled.  At first slowly, then more rapidly, the very forefront of
the center melted inward and forward and downward until it caught
the fierce rush of the freshet and shot out from under the jam.
Far up-stream, bristling and formidable, the tons of logs, grinding
savagely together, swept forward.

The six men and Bryan Moloney--who, it will be remembered, were
on top--worked until the last moment.  When the logs began to cave
under them so rapidly that even the expert rivermen found difficulty
in "staying on top," the foreman set the example of hunting safety.

"She 'pulls,' boys," he yelled.

Then in a manner wonderful to behold, through the smother of foam
and spray, through the crash and yell of timbers protesting the
flood's hurrying, through the leap of destruction, the drivers
zigzagged calmly and surely to the shore.

All but Jimmy Powers.  He poised tense and eager on the crumbling
face of the jam.  Almost immediately he saw what he wanted, and
without pause sprang boldly and confidently ten feet straight
downward, to alight with accuracy on a single log floating free
in the current.  And then in the very glory and chaos of the jam
itself he was swept down-stream.

After a moment the constant acceleration in speed checked, then
commenced perceptibly to slacken.  At once the rest of the crew
began to ride down-stream.  Each struck the caulks of his river
boots strongly into a log, and on such unstable vehicles floated
miles with the current.  From time to time, as Bryan Moloney
indicated, one of them went ashore.  There, usually at a bend of
the stream where the likelihood of jamming was great, they took
their stands.  When necessary, they ran out over the face of the
river to separate a congestion likely to cause trouble.  The rest
of the time they smoked their pipes.

At noon they ate from little canvas bags which had been filled
that morning by the cookee.  At sunset they rode other logs down
the river to where their camp had been made for them.  There they
ate hugely, hung their ice-wet garments over a tall framework
constructed around a monster fire, and turned in on hemlock
branches.

All night long the logs slipped down the moonlit current, silently,
swiftly, yet without haste.  The porcupines invaded the sleeping
camp.  From the whole length of the river rang the hollow BOOM,
BOOM, BOOM, of timbers striking one against the other.

The drive was on.



Chapter XLVII


In the meantime the main body of the crew under Thorpe and his
foremen were briskly tumbling the logs into the current.  Sometimes
under the urging of the peaveys, but a single stick would slide
down; or again a double tier would cascade with the roar of a
little Niagara.  The men had continually to keep on the tension of
an alert, for at any moment they were called upon to exercise their
best judgment and quickness to keep from being carried downward with
the rush of the logs.  Not infrequently a frowning sheer wall of
forty feet would hesitate on the brink of plunge.  Then Shearer
himself proved his right to the title of riverman.

Shearer wore caulks nearly an inch in length.  He had been known
to ride ten miles, without shifting his feet, on a log so small
that he could carry it without difficulty.  For cool nerve he was
unexcelled.

"I don't need you boys here any longer," he said quietly.

When the men had all withdrawn, he walked confidently under the front
of the rollway, glancing with practiced eye at the perpendicular wall
of logs over him.  Then, as a man pries jack-straws, he clamped his
peavey and tugged sharply.  At once the rollway flattened and toppled.
A mighty splash, a hurl of flying foam and crushing timbers, and the
spot on which the riverman had stood was buried beneath twenty feet
of solid green wood.  To Thorpe it seemed that Shearer must have been
overwhelmed, but the riverman always mysteriously appeared at one
side or the other, nonchalant, urging the men to work before the
logs should have ceased to move.  Tradition claimed that only once
in a long woods life had Shearer been forced to "take water" before
a breaking rollway: and then he saved his peavey.  History stated
that he had never lost a man on the river, simply and solely because
he invariably took the dangerous tasks upon himself.

As soon as the logs had caught the current, a dozen men urged them
on.  With their short peaveys, the drivers were enabled to prevent
the timbers from swirling in the eddies--one of the first causes of
a jam. At last, near the foot of the flats, they abandoned them to
the stream, confident that Moloney and his crew would see to their
passage down the river.

In three days the rollways were broken.  Now it became necessary to
start the rear.

For this purpose Billy Camp, the cook, had loaded his cook-stove, a
quantity of provisions, and a supply of bedding, aboard a scow.  The
scow was built of tremendous hewn timbers, four or five inches thick,
to withstand the shock of the logs.  At either end were long sweeps
to direct its course.  The craft was perhaps forty feet long, but
rather narrow, in order that it might pass easily through the chute
of a dam.  It was called the "wanigan."

Billy Camp, his cookee, and his crew of two were now doomed to
tribulation.  The huge, unwieldy craft from that moment was to
become possessed of the devil.  Down the white water of rapids it
would bump, smashing obstinately against boulders, impervious to
the frantic urging of the long sweeps; against the roots and
branches of the streamside it would scrape with the perverseness
of a vicious horse; in the broad reaches it would sulk, refusing
to proceed; and when expediency demanded its pause, it would drag
Billy Camp and his entire crew at the rope's end, while they tried
vainly to snub it against successively uprooted trees and stumps.
When at last the wanigan was moored fast for the night,--usually
a mile or so below the spot planned,--Billy Camp pushed back his
battered old brown derby hat, the badge of his office, with a sigh
of relief.  To be sure he and his men had still to cut wood,
construct cooking and camp fires, pitch tents, snip browse, and
prepare supper for seventy men; but the hard work of the day was
over.  Billy Camp did not mind rain or cold--he would cheerfully
cook away with the water dripping from his battered derby to his
chubby and cold-purpled nose--but he did mind the wanigan.  And the
worst of it was, he got no sympathy nor aid from the crew.  From
either bank he and his anxious struggling assistants were greeted
with ironic cheers and facetious remarks.  The tribulations of the
wanigan were as the salt of life to the spectators.

Billy Camp tried to keep back of the rear in clear water, but when
the wanigan so disposed, he found himself jammed close in the logs.
There he had a chance in his turn to become spectator, and so to
repay in kind some of the irony and facetiousness.

Along either bank, among the bushes, on sandbars, and in trees,
hundreds and hundreds of logs had been stranded when the main
drive passed.  These logs the rear crew were engaged in restoring
to the current.

And as a man had to be able to ride any kind of a log in any water;
to propel that log by jumping on it, by rolling it squirrel fashion
with the feet, by punting it as one would a canoe; to be skillful
in pushing, prying, and poling other logs from the quarter deck of
the same cranky craft; as he must be prepared at any and all times
to jump waist deep into the river, to work in ice-water hours at a
stretch; as he was called upon to break the most dangerous jams on
the river, representing, as they did, the accumulation which the jam
crew had left behind them, it was naturally considered the height
of glory to belong to the rear crew.  Here were the best of the
Fighting Forty,--men with a reputation as "white-water birlers"--
men afraid of nothing.

Every morning the crews were divided into two sections under Kerlie
and Jack Hyland.  Each crew had charge of one side of the river, with
the task of cleaning it thoroughly of all stranded and entangled
logs.  Scotty Parsons exercised a general supervisory eye over both
crews.  Shearer and Thorpe traveled back and forth the length of the
drive, riding the logs down stream, but taking to a partly submerged
pole trail when ascending the current.  On the surface of the river
in the clear water floated two long graceful boats called bateaux.
These were in charge of expert boatmen,--men able to propel their
craft swiftly forwards, backwards and sideways, through all kinds
of water.  They carried in racks a great supply of pike-poles,
peaveys, axes, rope and dynamite, for use in various emergencies.
Intense rivalry existed as to which crew "sacked" the farthest down
stream in the course of the day.  There was no need to urge the
men.  Some stood upon the logs, pushing mightily with the long
pike-poles.  Others, waist deep in the water, clamped the jaws of
their peaveys into the stubborn timbers, and, shoulder bent, slid
them slowly but surely into the swifter waters.  Still others,
lining up on either side of one of the great brown tree trunks,
carried it bodily to its appointed place.  From one end of the
rear to the other, shouts, calls, warnings, and jokes flew back
and forth.  Once or twice a vast roar of Homeric laughter went up
as some unfortunate slipped and soused into the water.  When the
current slacked, and the logs hesitated in their run, the entire
crew hastened, bobbing from log to log, down river to see about
it.  Then they broke the jam, standing surely on the edge of the
great darkness, while the ice water sucked in and out of their shoes.

Behind the rear Big Junko poled his bateau backwards and forwards
exploding dynamite.  Many of the bottom tiers of logs in the
rollways had been frozen down, and Big Junko had to loosen them
from the bed of the stream.  He was a big man, this, as his nickname
indicated, built of many awkwardnesses.  His cheekbones were high,
his nose flat, his lips thick and slobbery.  He sported a wide,
ferocious straggling mustache and long eye-brows, under which
gleamed little fierce eyes.  His forehead sloped back like a
beast's, but was always hidden by a disreputable felt hat.  Big
Junko did not know much, and had the passions of a wild animal,
but he was a reckless riverman and devoted to Thorpe.  Just now
he exploded dynamite.

The sticks of powder were piled amidships.  Big Junko crouched over
them, inserting the fuses and caps, closing the openings with soap,
finally lighting them, and dropping them into the water alongside,
where they immediately sank.  Then a few strokes of a short paddle
took him barely out of danger.  He huddled down in his craft,
waiting.  One, two, three seconds passed.  Then a hollow boom shook
the stream.  A cloud of water sprang up, strangely beautiful.  After
a moment the great brown logs rose suddenly to the surface from below,
one after the other, like leviathans of the deep.  And Junko watched,
dimly fascinated, in his rudimentary animal's brain, by the sight of
the power he had evoked to his aid.

When night came the men rode down stream to where the wanigan had
made camp.  There they slept, often in blankets wetted by the
wanigan's eccentricities, to leap to their feet at the first cry
in early morning.  Some days it rained, in which case they were
wet all the time.  Almost invariably there was a jam to break,
though strangely enough almost every one of the old-timers believed
implicitly that "in the full of the moon logs will run free at night."

Thorpe and Tim Shearer nearly always slept in a dog tent at the
rear; though occasionally they passed the night at Dam Two, where
Bryan Moloney and his crew were already engaged in sluicing the
logs through the chute.

The affair was simple enough.  Long booms arranged in the form of an
open V guided the drive to the sluice gate, through which a smooth
apron of water rushed to turmoil in an eddying pool below.  Two men
tramped steadily backwards and forwards on the booms, urging the
logs forward by means of long pike poles to where the suction could
seize them.  Below the dam, the push of the sluice water forced them
several miles down stream, where the rest of Bryan Moloney's crew
took them in charge.

Thus through the wide gate nearly three-quarters of a million feet
an hour could be run--a quantity more than sufficient to keep pace
with the exertions of the rear.  The matter was, of course, more or
less delayed by the necessity of breaking out such rollways as they
encountered from time to time on the banks.  At length, however, the
last of the logs drifted into the wide dam pool.  The rear had
arrived at Dam Two, and Thorpe congratulated himself that one stage
of his journey had been completed.  Billy Camp began to worry about
shooting the wanigan through the sluice-way.



Chapter XLVIII


The rear had been tenting at the dam for two days, and was about
ready to break camp, when Jimmy Powers swung across the trail to
tell them of the big jam.

Ten miles along the river bed, the stream dropped over a little
half-falls into a narrow, rocky gorge.  It was always an anxious
spot for the river drivers.  In fact, the plunging of the logs
head-on over the fall had so gouged out the soft rock below, that
an eddy of great power had formed in the basin.  Shearer and Thorpe
had often discussed the advisability of constructing an artificial
apron of logs to receive the impact.  Here, in spite of all efforts,
the jam had formed, first a little center of a few logs in the
middle of the stream, dividing the current, and shunting the logs
to right and left; then "wings" growing out from either bank, built
up from logs shunted too violently; finally a complete stoppage of
the channel, and the consequent rapid piling up as the pressure of
the drive increased.  Now the bed was completely filled, far above
the level of the falls, by a tangle that defied the jam crew's
best efforts.

The rear at once took the trail down the river.  Thorpe and Shearer
and Scotty Parsons looked over the ground.

"She may 'pull,' if she gets a good start," decided Tim.

Without delay the entire crew was set to work.  Nearly a hundred
men can pick a great many logs in the course of a day.  Several
times the jam started, but always "plugged" before the motion
had become irresistible.  This was mainly because the rocky walls
narrowed at a slight bend to the west, so that the drive was
throttled, as it were.  It was hoped that perhaps the middle of
the jam might burst through here, leaving the wings stranded.  The
hope was groundless.

"We'll have to shoot," Shearer reluctantly decided.

The men were withdrawn.  Scotty Parsons cut a sapling twelve feet
long, and trimmed it.  Big Junko thawed his dynamite at a little
fire, opening the ends of the packages in order that the steam
generated might escape.  Otherwise the pressure inside the oiled
paper of the package was capable of exploding the whole affair.
When the powder was warm, Scotty bound twenty of the cartridges
around the end of the sapling, adjusted a fuse in one of them, and
soaped the opening to exclude water.  Then Big Junko thrust the long
javelin down into the depths of the jam, leaving a thin stream of
smoke behind him as he turned away.  With sinister, evil eye he
watched the smoke for an instant, then zigzagged awkwardly over the
jam, the long, ridiculous tails of his brown cutaway coat flopping
behind him as he leaped.  A scant moment later the hoarse dynamite
shouted.

Great chunks of timber shot to an inconceivable height; entire logs
lifted bodily into the air with the motion of a fish jumping; a
fountain of water gleamed against the sun and showered down in fine
rain.  The jam shrugged and settled.  That was all; the "shot" had
failed.

The men ran forward, examining curiously the great hole in the log
formation.

"We'll have to flood her," said Thorpe.

So all the gates of the dam were raised, and the torrent tried
its hand.  It had no effect.  Evidently the affair was not one
of violence, but of patience.  The crew went doggedly to work.

Day after day the CLANK, CLANK, CLINK of the peaveys sounded with
the regularity of machinery.  The only practicable method was to
pick away the flank logs, leaving a long tongue pointing down-
stream from the center to start when it would.  This happened time
and again, but always failed to take with it the main jam.  It was
cruel hard work; a man who has lifted his utmost strength into a
peavey knows that.  Any but the Fighting Forty would have grumbled.

Collins, the bookkeeper, came up to view the tangle.  Later a
photographer from Marquette took some views, which, being
exhibited, attracted a great deal of attention, so that by the end
of the week a number of curiosity seekers were driving over every
day to see the Big Jam.  A certain Chicago journalist in search of
balsam health of lungs even sent to his paper a little item.  This,
unexpectedly, brought Wallace Carpenter to the spot.  Although
reassured as to the gravity of the situation, he remained to see.

The place was an amphitheater for such as chose to be spectators.
They could stand or sit on the summit of the gorge cliffs,
overlooking the river, the fall, and the jam.  As the cliff was
barely sixty feet high, the view lacked nothing in clearness.

At last Shearer became angry.

"We've been monkeying long enough," said he.  "Next time we'll
leave a center that WILL go out.  We'll shut the dams down tight
and dry-pick out two wings that'll start her."

The dams were first run at full speed, and then shut down.  Hardly
a drop of water flowed in the bed of the stream.  The crews set
laboriously to work to pull and roll the logs out in such flat
fashion that a head of water should send them out.

This was even harder work than the other, for they had not the
floating power of water to help them in the lifting.  As usual,
part of the men worked below, part above.

Jimmy Powers, curly-haired, laughing-faced, was irrepressible.  He
badgered the others until they threw bark at him and menaced him
with their peaveys.  Always he had at his tongue's end the proper
quip for the occasion, so that in the long run the work was
lightened by him.  When the men stopped to think at all, they
thought of Jimmy Powers with very kindly hearts, for it was known
that he had had more trouble than most, and that the coin was not
made too small for him to divide with a needy comrade.  To those who
had seen his mask of whole-souled good-nature fade into serious
sympathy, Jimmy Powers's poor little jokes were very funny indeed.

"Did 'je see th' Swede at the circus las' summer?" he would howl
to Red Jacket on the top tier.

"No," Red Jacket would answer, "was he there?"

"Yes," Jimmy Powers would reply; then, after a pause--"in a cage!"

It was a poor enough jest, yet if you had been there, you would
have found that somehow the log had in the meantime leaped of its
own accord from that difficult position.

Thorpe approved thoroughly of Jimmy Powers; he thought him a good
influence.  He told Wallace so, standing among the spectators on
the cliff-top.

"He is all right," said Thorpe.  "I wish I had more like him.  The
others are good boys, too."

Five men were at the moment tugging futilely at a reluctant timber.
They were attempting to roll one end of it over the side of another
projecting log, but were continually foiled, because the other end
was jammed fast.  Each bent his knees, inserting his shoulder under
the projecting peavey stock, to straighten in a mighty effort.

"Hire a boy!"  "Get some powder of Junko!"  "Have Jimmy talk it out!"
"Try that little one over by the corner," called the men on top of
the jam.

Everybody laughed, of course.  It was a fine spring day, clear-eyed
and crisp, with a hint of new foliage in the thick buds of the trees.
The air was so pellucid that one distinguished without difficulty
the straight entrance to the gorge a mile away, and even the West
Bend, fully five miles distant.

Jimmy Powers took off his cap and wiped his forehead.

"You boys," he remarked politely, "think you are boring with a
mighty big auger."

"My God!" screamed one of the spectators on top of the cliff.

At the same instant Wallace Carpenter seized his friend's arm and
pointed.

Down the bed of the stream from the upper bend rushed a solid wall
of water several feet high.  It flung itself forward with the
headlong impetus of a cascade.  Even in the short interval between
the visitor's exclamation and Carpenter's rapid gesture, it had
loomed into sight, twisted a dozen trees from the river bank, and
foamed into the entrance of the gorge.  An instant later it collided
with the tail of the jam.

Even in the railroad rush of those few moments several things
happened.  Thorpe leaped for a rope.  The crew working on top
of the jam ducked instinctively to right and left and began to
scramble towards safety.  The men below, at first bewildered and
not comprehending, finally understood, and ran towards the face
of the jam with the intention of clambering up it.  There could
be no escape in the narrow canyon below, the walls of which rose
sheer.

Then the flood hit square.  It was the impact of resistible power.
A great sheet of water rose like surf from the tail of the jam;
a mighty cataract poured down over its surface, lifting the free
logs; from either wing timbers crunched, split, rose suddenly into
wracked prominence, twisted beyond the semblance of themselves.
Here and there single logs were even projected bodily upwards, as
an apple seed is shot from between the thumb and forefinger.  Then
the jam moved.

Scotty Parsons, Jack Hyland, Red Jacket, and the forty or fifty top
men had reached the shore.  By the wriggling activity which is a
riverman's alone, they succeeded in pulling themselves beyond the
snap of death's jaws.  It was a narrow thing for most of them, and
a miracle for some.

Jimmy Powers, Archie Harris, Long Pine Jim, Big Nolan, and Mike
Moloney, the brother of Bryan, were in worse case.  They were,
as has been said, engaged in "flattening" part of the jam about
eight or ten rods below the face of it.  When they finally
understood that the affair was one of escape, they ran towards
the jam, hoping to climb out.  Then the crash came.  They heard
the roar of the waters, the wrecking of the timbers, they saw the
logs bulge outwards in anticipation of the break.  Immediately
they turned and fled, they knew not where.

All but Jimmy Powers.  He stopped short in his tracks, and threw
his battered old felt hat defiantly full into the face of the
destruction hanging over him.  Then, his bright hair blowing in
the wind of death, he turned to the spectators standing helpless
and paralyzed, forty feet above him.

It was an instant's impression,--the arrested motion seen in the
flash of lightning--and yet to the onlookers it had somehow the
quality of time.  For perceptible duration it seemed to them they
stared at the contrast between the raging hell above and the yet
peaceable river bed below.  They were destined to remember that
picture the rest of their natural lives, in such detail that each
one of them could almost have reproduced it photographically by
simply closing his eyes.  Yet afterwards, when they attempted to
recall definitely the impression, they knew it could have lasted
but a fraction of a second, for the reason that, clear and distinct
in each man's mind, the images of the fleeing men retained definite
attitudes.  It was the instantaneous photography of events.

"So long, boys," they heard Jimmy Powers's voice.  Then the rope
Thorpe had thrown fell across a caldron of tortured waters and of
tossing logs.



Chapter XLIX


During perhaps ten seconds the survivors watched the end of Thorpe's
rope trailing in the flood.  Then the young man with a deep sigh
began to pull it towards him.

At once a hundred surmises, questions, ejaculations broke out.

"What happened?" cried Wallace Carpenter.

"What was that man's name?" asked the Chicago journalist with the
eager instinct of his profession.

"This is terrible, terrible, terrible!" a white-haired physician
from Marquette kept repeating over and over.

A half dozen ran towards the point of the cliff to peer down stream,
as though they could hope to distinguish anything in that waste of
flood water.

"The dam's gone out," replied Thorpe.  "I don't understand it.
Everything was in good shape, as far as I could see.  It didn't
act like an ordinary break.  The water came too fast.  Why, it was
as dry as a bone until just as that wave came along.  An ordinary
break would have eaten through little by little before it burst,
and Davis should have been able to stop it.  This came all at once,
as if the dam had disappeared.  I don't see."

His mind of the professional had already began to query causes.

"How about the men?" asked Wallace.  "Isn't there something I can
do?"

"You can head a hunt down the river," answered Thorpe.  "I think
it is useless until the water goes down.  Poor Jimmy.  He was one
of the best men I had.  I wouldn't have had this happen---"

The horror of the scene was at last beginning to filter through
numbness into Wallace Carpenter's impressionable imagination.

"No, no!" he cried vehemently.  "There is something criminal about
it to me!  I'd rather lose every log in the river!"

Thorpe looked at him curiously.  "It is one of the chances of war,"
said he, unable to refrain from the utterance of his creed.  "We all
know it."

"I'd better divide the crew and take in both banks of the river,"
suggested Wallace in his constitutional necessity of doing something.

"See if you can't get volunteers from this crowd," suggested Thorpe.
"I can let you have two men to show you trails.  If you can make it
that way, it will help me out.  I need as many of the crew as
possible to use this flood water."

"Oh, Harry," cried Carpenter, shocked.  "You can't be going to work
again to-day after that horrible sight, before we have made the
slightest effort to recover the bodies!"

"If the bodies can be recovered, they shall be," replied Thorpe
quietly.  "But the drive will not wait.  We have no dams to depend
on now, you must remember, and we shall have to get out on freshet
water."

"Your men won't work.  I'd refuse just as they will!" cried
Carpenter, his sensibilities still suffering.

Thorpe smiled proudly.  "You do not know them.  They are mine.  I
hold them in the hollow of my hand!"

"By Jove!" cried the journalist in sudden enthusiasm.  "By Jove!
that is magnificent!"

The men of the river crew had crouched on their narrow footholds
while the jam went out.  Each had clung to his peavey, as is the
habit of rivermen.  Down the current past their feet swept the
debris of flood.  Soon logs began to swirl by,--at first few, then
many from the remaining rollways which the river had automatically
broken.  In a little time the eddy caught up some of these logs, and
immediately the inception of another jam threatened.  The rivermen,
without hesitation, as calmly as though catastrophe had not thrown
the weight of its moral terror against their stoicism, sprang,
peavey in hand, to the insistent work.

"By Jove!" said the journalist again.  "That is magnificent!  They
are working over the spot where their comrades died!"

Thorpe's face lit with gratification.  He turned to the young man.

"You see," he said in proud simplicity.

With the added danger of freshet water, the work went on.

At this moment Tim Shearer approached from inland, his clothes
dripping wet, but his face retaining its habitual expression of
iron calmness.  "Anybody caught?" was his first question as he
drew near.

"Five men under the face," replied Thorpe briefly.

Shearer cast a glance at the river.  He needed to be told no more.

"I was afraid of it," said he.  "The rollways must be all broken
out.  It's saved us that much, but the freshet water won't last
long.  It's going to be a close squeak to get 'em out now.  Don't
exactly figure on what struck the dam.  Thought first I'd go right
up that way, but then I came down to see about the boys."

Carpenter could not understand this apparent callousness on the
part of men in whom he had always thought to recognize a fund of
rough but genuine feeling.  To him the sacredness of death was
incompatible with the insistence of work.  To these others the
two, grim necessity, went hand in hand.

"Where were you?" asked Thorpe of Shearer.

"On the pole trail.  I got in a little, as you see."

In reality the foreman had had a close call for his life.  A
toughly-rooted basswood alone had saved him.

"We'd better go up and take a look," he suggested.  "Th' boys has
things going here all right."

The two men turned towards the brush.

"Hi, Tim," called a voice behind them.

Red Jacket appeared clambering up the cliff.

"Jack told me to give this to you," he panted, holding out a chunk
of strangely twisted wood.

"Where'd he get this?" inquired Thorpe, quickly.  "It's a piece
of the dam," he explained to Wallace, who had drawn near.

"Picked it out of the current," replied the man.

The foreman and his boss bent eagerly over the morsel.  Then they
stared with solemnity into each other's eyes.

"Dynamite, by God!" exclaimed Shearer.



Chapter L


For a moment the three men stared at each other without speaking.

"What does it mean?" almost whispered Carpenter.

"Mean?  Foul play!" snarled Thorpe.  "Come on, Tim."

The two struck into the brush, threading the paths with the ease
of woodsmen.  It was necessary to keep to the high inland ridges for
the simple reason that the pole trail had by now become impassable.
Wallace Carpenter, attempting to follow them, ran, stumbled, and
fell through brush that continually whipped his face and garments,
continually tripped his feet.  All he could obtain was a vanishing
glimpse of his companions' backs.  Thorpe and his foreman talked
briefly.

"It's Morrison and Daly," surmised Shearer.  "I left them 'count
of a trick like that.  They wanted me to take charge of Perkinson's
drive and hang her a purpose.  I been suspecting something--they've
been layin' too low."

Thorpe answered nothing.  Through the site of the old dam they
found a torrent pouring from the narrowed pond, at the end of which
the dilapidated wings flapping in the current attested the former
structure.  Davis stood staring at the current.

Thorpe strode forward and shook him violently by the shoulder.

"How did this happen?" he demanded hoarsely.  "Speak!"

The man turned to him in a daze.  "I don't know," he answered.

"You ought to know.  How was that 'shot' exploded?  How did they
get in here without you seeing them?  Answer me!"

"I don't know," repeated the man.  "I jest went over in th' bresh
to kill a few pa'tridges, and when I come back I found her this
way.  I wasn't goin' to close down for three hours yet, and I
thought they was no use a hangin' around here."

"Were you hired to watch this dam, or weren't you?" demanded the
tense voice of Thorpe.  "Answer me, you fool."

"Yes, I was," returned the man, a shade of aggression creeping
into his voice.

"Well, you've done it well.  You've cost me my dam, and you've
killed five men.  If the crew finds out about you, you'll go over
the falls, sure.  You get out of here!  Pike!  Don't you ever let
me see your face again!"

The man blanched as he thus learned of his comrades' deaths.  Thorpe
thrust his face at him, lashed by circumstances beyond his habitual
self-control.

"It's men like you who make the trouble," he stormed.  "Damn fools
who say they didn't mean to.  It isn't enough not to mean to.  They
should MEAN NOT TO!  I don't ask you to think.  I just want you to
do what I tell you, and you can't even do that."

He threw his shoulder into a heavy blow that reached the dam watcher's
face, and followed it immediately by another.  Then Shearer caught his
arm, motioning the dazed and bloody victim of the attack to get out of
sight.  Thorpe shook his foreman off with one impatient motion, and
strode away up the river, his head erect, his eyes flashing, his
nostrils distended.

"I reckon you'd better mosey," Shearer dryly advised the dam watcher;
and followed.

Late in the afternoon the two men reached Dam Three, or rather the
spot on which Dam Three had stood.  The same spectacle repeated
itself here, except that Ellis, the dam watcher, was nowhere to
be seen.

"The dirty whelps," cried Thorpe, "they did a good job!"

He thrashed about here and there, and so came across Ellis
blindfolded and tied.  When released, the dam watcher was
unable to give any account of his assailants.

"They came up behind me while I was cooking," he said.  "One of
'em grabbed me and the other one kivered my eyes.  Then I hears
the 'shot' and knows there's trouble."

Thorpe listened in silence.  Shearer asked a few questions.  After
the low-voiced conversation Thorpe arose abruptly.

"Where you going?" asked Shearer.

But the young man did not reply.  He swung, with the same long,
nervous stride, into the down-river trail.

Until late that night the three men--for Ellis insisted on
accompanying them--hurried through the forest.  Thorpe walked
tirelessly, upheld by his violent but repressed excitement.  When
his hat fell from his head, he either did not notice the fact, or
did not care to trouble himself for its recovery, so he glanced
through the trees bare-headed, his broad white brow gleaming in
the moonlight.  Shearer noted the fire in his eyes, and from the
coolness of his greater age, counselled moderation.

"I wouldn't stir the boys up," he panted, for the pace was very
swift.  "They'll kill some one over there, it'll be murder on
both sides."

He received no answer.  About midnight they came to the camp.

Two great fires leaped among the trees, and the men, past the idea
of sleep, grouped between them, talking.  The lesson of twisted
timbers was not lost to their experience, and the evening had
brought its accumulation of slow anger against the perpetrators of
the outrage.  These men were not given to oratorical mouthings, but
their low-voiced exchanges between the puffings of a pipe led to a
steadier purpose than that of hysteria.  Even as the woodsmen joined
their group, they had reached the intensity of execution.  Across
their purpose Thorpe threw violently his personality.

"You must not go," he commanded.

Through their anger they looked at him askance.

"I forbid it," Thorpe cried.

They shrugged their indifference and arose.  This was an affair of
caste brotherhood; and the blood of their mates cried out to them.

"The work," Thorpe shouted hoarsely.  "The work!  We must get those
logs out!  We haven't time!"

But the Fighting Forty had not Thorpe's ideal.  Success meant a
day's work well done; while vengeance stood for a righting of the
realities which had been unrighteously overturned.  Thorpe's dry-
eyed, burning, almost mad insistence on the importance of the
day's task had not its ordinary force.  They looked upon him from
a standpoint apart, calmly, dispassionately, as one looks on a
petulant child.  The grim call of tragedy had lifted them above
little mundane things.

Then swiftly between the white, strained face of the madman trying
to convince his heart that his mind had been right, and the
fanatically exalted rivermen, interposed the sanity of Radway.
The old jobber faced the men calmly, almost humorously, and somehow
the very bigness of the man commanded attention.  When he spoke,
his coarse, good-natured, everyday voice fell through the tense
situation, clarifying it, restoring it to the normal.

"You fellows make me sick," said he.  "You haven't got the sense
God gave a rooster.  Don't you see you're playing right in those
fellows' hands?  What do you suppose they dynamited them dams for?
To kill our boys?  Don't you believe it for a minute.  They never
dreamed we was dry pickin' that jam.  They sent some low-lived whelp
down there to hang our drive, and by smoke it looks like they was
going to succeed, thanks to you mutton-heads.

"'Spose you go over and take 'em apart; what then?  You have a
scrap; probably you lick 'em."  The men growled ominously, but did
not stir.  "You whale daylights out of a lot of men who probably
don't know any more about this here shooting of our dams than a hog
does about a ruffled shirt.  Meanwhile your drive hangs.  Well?
Well?  Do you suppose the men who were back of that shooting, do
you suppose Morrison and Daly give a tinker's dam how many men of
theirs you lick?  What they want is to hang our drive.  If they
hang our drive, it's cheap at the price of a few black eyes."

The speaker paused and grinned good-humoredly at the men's attentive
faces.  Then suddenly his own became grave, and he swung into his
argument all the impressiveness of his great bulk,

"Do you want to know how to get even?" he asked, shading each word.
"Do you want to know how to make those fellows sing so small you
can't hear them?  Well, I'll tell you.  TAKE OUT THIS DRIVE!  Do
it in spite of them!  Show them they're no good when they buck up
against Thorpe's One!  Our boys died doing their duty--the way a
riverman ought to.  NOW HUMP YOURSELVES!  Don't let 'em die in vain!"

The crew stirred uneasily, looking at each other for approval of the
conversion each had experienced.  Radway, seizing the psychological
moment, turned easily toward the blaze.

"Better turn in, boys, and get some sleep," he said.  "We've got a
hard day to-morrow."  He stooped to light his pipe at the fire.  When
he had again straightened his back after rather a prolonged interval,
the group had already disintegrated.  A few minutes later the cookee
scattered the brands of the fire from before a sleeping camp.

Thorpe had listened non-committally to the colloquy.  He had
maintained the suspended attitude of a man who is willing to allow
the trial of other methods, but who does not therefore relinquish
his own.  At the favorable termination of the discussion he turned
away without comment.  He expected to gain this result.  Had he
been in a more judicial state of mind he might have perceived at
last the reason, in the complicated scheme of Providence, for his
long connection with John Radway.



Chapter LI


Before daylight Injin Charley drifted into the camp to find Thorpe
already out.  With a curt nod the Indian seated himself by the fire,
and, producing a square plug of tobacco and a knife, began leisurely
to fill his pipe.  Thorpe watched him in silence.  Finally Injin
Charley spoke in the red man's clear-cut, imitative English, a
pause between each sentence.

"I find trail three men," said he.  "Both dam, three men.  One man
go down river.  Those men have cork-boot.  One man no have cork-boot.
He boss."  The Indian suddenly threw his chin out, his head back,
half closed his eyes in a cynical squint.  As by a flash Dyer, the
scaler, leered insolently from behind the Indian's stolid mask.

"How do you know?" said Thorpe.

For answer the Indian threw his shoulders forward in Dyer's nervous
fashion.

"He make trail big by the toe, light by the heel.  He make trail
big on inside."

Charley arose and walked, after Dyer's springy fashion, illustrating
his point in the soft wood ashes of the immediate fireside.

Thorpe looked doubtful.  "I believe you are right, Charley," said
he.  "But it is mighty little to go on.  You can't be sure."

"I sure," replied Charley.

He puffed strongly at the heel of his smoke, then arose, and without
farewell disappeared in the forest.

Thorpe ranged the camp impatiently, glancing often at the sky.  At
length he laid fresh logs on the fire and aroused the cook.  It was
bitter cold in the early morning.  After a time the men turned out
of their own accord, at first yawning with insufficient rest, and
then becoming grimly tense as their returned wits reminded them of
the situation.

From that moment began the wonderful struggle against circumstances
which has become a by-word among rivermen everywhere.  A forty-day
drive had to go out in ten.  A freshet had to float out thirty
million feet of logs.  It was tremendous; as even the men most
deeply buried in the heavy hours of that time dimly realized.
It was epic; as the journalist, by now thoroughly aroused, soon
succeeded in convincing his editors and his public.  Fourteen,
sixteen, sometimes eighteen hours a day, the men of the driving
crew worked like demons.  Jams had no chance to form.  The phenomenal
activity of the rear crew reduced by half the inevitable sacking.
Of course, under the pressure, the lower dam had gone out.  Nothing
was to be depended on but sheer dogged grit.  Far up-river Sadler &
Smith had hung their drive for the season.  They had stretched heavy
booms across the current, and so had resigned themselves to a
definite but not extraordinary loss.  Thorpe had at least a clear
river.

Wallace Carpenter could not understand how human flesh and blood
endured.  The men themselves had long since reached the point of
practical exhaustion, but were carried through by the fire of their
leader.  Work was dogged until he stormed into sight; then it became
frenzied.  He seemed to impart to those about him a nervous force
and excitability as real as that induced by brandy.  When he looked
at a man from his cavernous, burning eyes, that man jumped.

It was all willing enough work.  Several definite causes, each
adequate alone to something extraordinary, focussed to the necessity.
His men worshipped Thorpe; the idea of thwarting the purposes of
their comrade's murderers retained its strength; the innate pride
of caste and craft--the sturdiest virtue of the riverman--was in
these picked men increased to the dignity of a passion.  The great
psychological forces of a successful career gathered and made head
against the circumstances which such careers always arouse in
polarity.

Impossibilities were puffed aside like thistles.  The men went at
them headlong.  They gave way before the rush.  Thorpe always led.
Not for a single instant of the day nor for many at night was he
at rest.  He was like a man who has taken a deep breath to reach
a definite goal, and who cannot exhale until the burst of speed be
over.  Instinctively he seemed to realize that a let-down would
mean collapse.

After the camp had fallen asleep, he would often lie awake half of
the few hours of their night, every muscle tense, staring at the
sky.  His mind saw definitely every detail of the situation as he
had last viewed it.  In advance his imagination stooped and sweated
to the work which his body was to accomplish the next morning.
Thus he did everything twice.  Then at last the tension would relax.
He would fall into uneasy sleep.  But twice that did not follow.
Through the dissolving iron mist of his striving, a sharp thought
cleaved like an arrow.  It was that after all he did not care.  The
religion of Success no longer held him as its devoutest worshiper.
He was throwing the fibers of his life into the engine of toil, not
because of moral duty, but because of moral pride.  He meant to
succeed in order to prove to himself that he had not been wrong.

The pain of the arrow-wound always aroused him from his doze with a
start.  He grimly laughed the thought out of court.  To his waking
moments his religion was sincere, was real.  But deep down in his
sub-consciousness, below his recognition, the other influence was
growing like a weed.  Perhaps the vision, not the waking, had been
right.  Perhaps that far-off beautiful dream of a girl which Thorpe's
idealism had constructed from; the reactionary necessities of
Thorpe's harsh life had been more real than his forest temples
of his ruthless god!  Perhaps there were greater things than to
succeed, greater things than success.  Perhaps, after all, the
Power that put us here demands more that we cleave one to the other
in loving-kindness than that we learn to blow the penny whistles it
has tossed us.  And then the keen, poignant memory of the dream girl
stole into the young man's mind, and in agony was immediately thrust
forth.  He would not think of her.  He had given her up.  He had
cast the die.  For success he had bartered her, in the noblest, the
loftiest spirit of devotion.  He refused to believe that devotion
fanatical; he refused to believe that he had been wrong.  In the
still darkness of the night he would rise and steal to the edge of
the dully roaring stream.  There, his eyes blinded and his throat
choked with a longing more manly than tears, he would reach out
and smooth the round rough coats of the great logs.

"We'll do it!" he whispered to them--and to himself.  "We'll do it!
We can't be wrong.  God would not have let us!"



Chapter LII


Wallace Carpenter's search expedition had proved a failure, as
Thorpe had foreseen, but at the end of the week, when the water
began to recede, the little beagles ran upon a mass of flesh
and bones.  The man was unrecognizable, either as an individual or
as a human being.  The remains were wrapped in canvas and sent for
interment in the cemetery at Marquette.  Three of the others were
never found.  The last did not come to light until after the drive
had quite finished.

Down at the booms the jam crew received the drive as fast as it
came down.  From one crib to another across the broad extent of the
river's mouth, heavy booms were chained end to end effectually to
close the exit to Lake Superior.  Against these the logs caromed
softly in the slackened current, and stopped.  The cribs were very
heavy with slanting, instead of square, tops, in order that the
pressure might be downwards instead of sidewise.  This guaranteed
their permanency.  In a short time the surface of the lagoon was
covered by a brown carpet of logs running in strange patterns like
windrows of fallen grain.  Finally, across the straight middle
distance of the river, appeared little agitated specks leaping
back and forth.  Thus the rear came in sight and the drive was
all but over.

Up till now the weather had been clear but oppressively hot for
this time of year.  The heat had come suddenly and maintained itself
well.  It had searched out with fierce directness all the patches of
snow lying under the thick firs and balsams of the swamp edge, it
had shaken loose the anchor ice of the marsh bottoms, and so had
materially aided the success of the drive by increase of water.
The men had worked for the most part in undershirts.  They were as
much in the water as out of it, for the icy bath had become almost
grateful.  Hamilton, the journalist, who had attached himself
definitely to the drive, distributed bunches of papers, in which
the men read that the unseasonable condition prevailed all over
the country.

At length, however, it gave signs of breaking.  The sky, which
had been of a steel blue, harbored great piled thunder-heads.
Occasionally athwart the heat shot a streak of cold air.  Towards
evening the thunder-heads shifted and finally dissipated, to be
sure, but the portent was there.

Hamilton's papers began to tell of disturbances in the South and
West.  A washout in Arkansas derailed a train; a cloud-burst in
Texas wiped out a camp; the cities along the Ohio River were
enjoying their annual flood with the usual concomitants of floating
houses and boats in the streets.  The men wished they had some of
that water here.

So finally the drive approached its end and all concerned began in
anticipation to taste the weariness that awaited them.  They had
hurried their powers.  The few remaining tasks still confronting
them, all at once seemed more formidable than what they had
accomplished.  They could not contemplate further exertion.  The
work for the first time became dogged, distasteful.  Even Thorpe
was infected.  He, too, wanted more than anything else to drop on
the bed in Mrs. Hathaway's boarding house, there to sponge from his
mind all colors but the dead gray of rest.  There remained but a few
things to do.  A mile of sacking would carry the drive beyond the
influence of freshet water.  After that there would be no hurry.

He looked around at the hard, fatigue-worn faces of the men about
him, and in the obsession of his wearied mood he suddenly felt a
great rush of affection for these comrades who had so unreservedly
spent themselves for his affair.  Their features showed exhaustion,
it is true, but their eyes gleamed still with the steady half-
humorous purpose of the pioneer.  When they caught his glance they
grinned good-humoredly.

All at once Thorpe turned and started for the bank.

"That'll do, boys," he said quietly to the nearest group.  "She's
down!"

It was noon.  The sackers looked up in surprise.  Behind them, to
their very feet, rushed the soft smooth slope of Hemlock Rapids.
Below them flowed a broad, peaceful river.  The drive had passed
its last obstruction.  To all intents and purposes it was over.

Calmly, with matter-of-fact directness, as though they had not
achieved the impossible; as though they, a handful, had not cheated
nature and powerful enemies, they shouldered their peaveys and
struck into the broad wagon road.  In the middle distance loomed the
tall stacks of the mill with the little board town about it.  Across
the eye spun the thread of the railroad.  Far away gleamed the broad
expanses of Lake Superior.

The cook had, early that morning, moored the wanigan to the bank.
One of the teamsters from town had loaded the men's "turkeys" on
his heavy wagon.  The wanigan's crew had thereupon trudged into
town.

The men paired off naturally and fell into a dragging, dogged walk.
Thorpe found himself unexpectedly with Big Junko.  For a time they
plodded on without conversation.  Then the big man ventured a remark.

"I'm glad she's over," said he.  "I got a good stake comin'."

"Yes," replied Thorpe indifferently.

"I got most six hundred dollars comin'," persisted Junko.

"Might as well be six hundred cents," commented Thorpe, "it'd
make you just as drunk."

Big Junko laughed self-consciously but without the slightest
resentment.

"That's all right," said he, "but you betcher life I don't blow
this stake."

"I've heard that talk before," shrugged Thorpe.

"Yes, but this is different.  I'm goin' to git married on this.
How's THAT?"

Thorpe, his attention struck at last, stared at his companion.  He
noted the man's little twinkling animal eyes, his high cheek bones,
his flat nose, his thick and slobbery lips, his straggling, fierce
mustache and eyebrows, his grotesque long-tailed cutaway coat.  So
to him, too, this primitive man reaching dully from primordial chaos,
the great moment had yielded its vision.

"Who is she?" he asked abruptly.

"She used to wash at Camp Four."

Thorpe dimly remembered the woman now--an overweighted creature
with a certain attraction of elfishly blowing hair, with a certain
pleasing full-cheeked, full-bosomed health.

The two walked on in re-established silence.  Finally the giant,
unable to contain himself longer, broke out again.

"I do like that woman," said he with a quaintly deliberate
seriousness.
"That's the finest woman in this district."

Thorpe felt the quick moisture rush to his eyes.  There was something
inexpressibly touching in those simple words as Big Junko uttered
them.

"And when you are married," he asked, "what are you going to do?  Are
you going to stay on the river?"

"No, I'm goin' to clear a farm.  The woman she says that's the thing
to do.  I like the river, too.  But you bet when Carrie says a thing,
that's plenty good enough for Big Junko."

"Suppose," suggested Thorpe, irresistibly impelled towards the
attempt, "suppose I should offer you two hundred dollars a month
to stay on the river.  Would you stay?"

"Carrie don't like it," replied Junko.

"Two hundred dollars is big wages," persisted Thorpe.  "It's twice
what I give Radway."

"I'd like to ask Carrie."

"No, take it or leave it now."

"Well, Carrie says she don't like it," answered the riverman with
a sigh.

Thorpe looked at his companion fixedly.  Somehow the bestial
countenance had taken on an attraction of its own.  He remembered
Big Junko as a wild beast when his passions were aroused, as a man
whose honesty had been doubted.

"You've changed, Junko," said he.

"I know," said the big man.  "I been a scalawag all right.  I quit
it.  I don't know much, but Carrie she's smart, and I'm goin' to do
what she says.  When you get stuck on a good woman like Carrie, Mr.
Thorpe, you don't give much of a damn for anything else.  Sure!
That's right!  It's the biggest thing top o' earth!"

Here it was again, the opposing creed.  And from such a source.
Thorpe's iron will contracted again.

"A woman is no excuse for a man's neglecting his work," he snapped.

"Shorely not," agreed Junko serenely.  "I aim to finish out my time
all right, Mr. Thorpe.  Don't you worry none about that.  I done my
best for you.  And," went on the riverman in the expansion of this
unwonted confidence with his employer, "I'd like to rise to remark
that you're the best boss I ever had, and we boys wants to stay with
her till there's skating in hell!"

"All right," murmured Thorpe indifferently.

His momentary interest had left him.  Again the reactionary weariness
dragged at his feet.  Suddenly the remaining half mile to town seemed
very long indeed.



Chapter LIII


Wallace Carpenter and Hamilton, the journalist, seated against
the sun-warmed bench of Mrs. Hathaway's boarding-house, commented
on the band as it stumbled in to the wash-room.

"Those men don't know how big they are," remarked the journalist.
That's the way with most big men.  And that man Thorpe belongs to
another age.  I'd like to get him to telling his experiences; he'd
be a gold mine to me."

"And would require about as much trouble to 'work,'" laughed
Wallace.  "He won't talk."

"That's generally the trouble, confound 'em," sighed Hamilton.
"The fellows who CAN talk haven't anything to say; and those who
have something to tell are dumb as oysters.  I've got him in though."
He spread one of a roll of papers on his knees.  "I got a set of
duplicates for you.  Thought you might like to keep them.  The
office tells me," he concluded modestly, "that they are attracting
lots of attention, but are looked upon as being a rather clever
sort of fiction."

Wallace picked up the sheet.  His eye was at once met by the heading,
"'So long, boys,'" in letters a half inch in height, and immediately
underneath in smaller type, "said Jimmy Powers, and threw his hat in
the face of death."

"It's all there," explained the journalist, "--the jam and the break,
and all this magnificent struggle afterwards.  It makes a great yarn.
I feel tempted sometimes to help it out a little--artistically, you
know--but of course that wouldn't do.  She'd make a ripping yarn,
though, if I could get up some motive outside mere trade rivalry
for the blowing up of those dams.  That would just round it off."

Wallace Carpenter was about to reply that such a motive actually
existed, when the conversation was interrupted by the approach of
Thorpe and Big Junko.  The former looked twenty years older after
his winter.  His eye was dull, his shoulders drooped, his gait was
inelastic.  The whole bearing of the man was that of one weary to
the bone.

"I've got something here to show you, Harry," cried Wallace Carpenter,
waving one of the papers.  "It was a great drive and here's something
to remember it by."

"All right, Wallace, by and by," replied Thorpe dully.  "I'm dead.
I'm going to turn in for a while.  I need sleep more than anything
else.  I can't think now."

He passed through the little passage into the "parlor bed-room,"
which Mrs. Hathaway always kept in readiness for members of the
firm.  There he fell heavily asleep almost before his body had
met the bed.

In the long dining room the rivermen consumed a belated dinner.
They had no comments to make.  It was over.

The two on the veranda smoked.  To the right, at the end of the
sawdust street, the mill sang its varying and lulling keys.  The
odor of fresh-sawed pine perfumed the air.  Not a hundred yards away
the river slipped silently to the distant blue Superior, escaping
between the slanting stone-filled cribs which held back the logs.
Down the south and west the huge thunderheads gathered and flashed
and grumbled, as they had done every afternoon for days previous.

"Queer thing," commented Hamilton finally, "these cold streaks in
the air.  They are just as distinct as though they had partitions
around them."

"Queer climate anyway," agreed Carpenter.

Excepting always for the mill, the little settlement appeared asleep.
The main booms were quite deserted.  Not a single figure, armed with
its picturesque pike-pole, loomed athwart the distance.  After awhile
Hamilton noticed something.

"Look here, Carpenter," said he, "what's happening out there?  Have
some of your confounded logs SUNK, or what?  There don't seem to be
near so many of them somehow."

"No, it isn't that," proffered Carpenter after a moment's scrutiny,
"there are just as many logs, but they are getting separated a
little so you can see the open water between them."

"Guess you're right.  Say, look here, I believe that the river is
rising!"

"Nonsense, we haven't had any rain."

"She's rising just the same.  I'll tell you how I know; you see
that spile over there near the left-hand crib?  Well, I sat on the
boom this morning watching the crew, and I whittled the spile with
my knife--you can see the marks from here.  I cut the thing about
two feet above the water.  Look at it now."

"She's pretty near the water line, that's right," admitted
Carpenter.

"I should think that might make the boys hot," commented Hamilton.
"If they'd known this was coming, they needn't have hustled so to
get the drive down.

"That's so," Wallace agreed.

About an hour later the younger man in his turn made a discovery.

"She's been rising right along," he submitted.  "Your marks are
nearer the water, and, do you know, I believe the logs are beginning
to feel it.  See, they've closed up the little openings between them,
and they are beginning to crowd down to the lower end of the pond."

"I don't know anything about this business," hazarded the journalist,
"but by the mere look of the thing I should think there was a good
deal of pressure on that same lower end.  By Jove, look there!  See
those logs up-end?  I believe you're going to have a jam right here
in your own booms!"

"I don't know," hesitated Wallace,  "I never heard of its happening."

"You'd better let someone know."

"I hate to bother Harry or any of the rivermen.  I'll just step down
to the mill.  Mason--he's our mill foreman--he'll know."

Mason came to the edge of the high trestle and took one look.

"Jumping fish-hooks!" he cried.  "Why, the river's up six inches
and still a comin'!  Here you, Tom!" he called to one of the yard
hands, "you tell Solly to get steam on that tug double quick, and
have Dave hustle together his driver crew."

"What you going to do?" asked Wallace.

"I got to strengthen the booms," explained the mill foreman.  "We'll
drive some piles across between the cribs."

"Is there any danger?"

"Oh, no, the river would have to rise a good deal higher than she
is now to make current enough to hurt.  They've had a hard rain up
above.  This will go down in a few hours."

After a time the tug puffed up to the booms, escorting the pile
driver.  The latter towed a little raft of long sharpened piles,
which it at once began to drive in such positions as would most
effectually strengthen the booms.  In the meantime the thunder-
heads had slyly climbed the heavens, so that a sudden deluge of
rain surprised the workmen.  For an hour it poured down in torrents;
then settled to a steady gray beat.  Immediately the aspect had
changed.  The distant rise of land was veiled; the brown expanse
of logs became slippery and glistening; the river below the booms
was picked into staccato points by the drops; distant Superior
turned lead color and seemed to tumble strangely athwart the horizon.

Solly, the tug captain, looked at his mooring hawsers and then at
the nearest crib.

"She's riz two inches in th' las' two hours," he announced, "and
she's runnin' like a mill race."  Solly was a typical north-country
tug captain, short and broad, with a brown, clear face, and the
steadiest and calmest of steel-blue eyes.  "When she begins to feel
th' pressure behind," he went on, "there's goin' to be trouble."

Towards dusk she began to feel that pressure.  Through the rainy
twilight the logs could be seen raising their ghostly arms of
protest.  Slowly, without tumult, the jam formed.  In the van the
logs crossed silently; in the rear they pressed in, were sucked
under in the swift water, and came to rest at the bottom of the
river.  The current of the river began to protest, pressing its
hydraulics through the narrowing crevices.  The situation demanded
attention.

A breeze began to pull off shore in the body of rain.  Little by
little it increased, sending the water by in gusts, ruffling the
already hurrying river into greater haste, raising far from the
shore dimly perceived white-caps.  Between the roaring of the wind,
the dash of rain, and the rush of the stream, men had to shout to
make themselves heard.

"Guess you'd better rout out the boss," screamed Solly to Wallace
Carpenter; "this damn water's comin' up an inch an hour right
along.  When she backs up once, she'll push this jam out sure."

Wallace ran to the boarding house and roused his partner from a
heavy sleep.  The latter understood the situation at a word.  While
dressing, he explained to the younger man wherein lay the danger.

"If the jam breaks once," said he, "nothing top of earth can prevent
it from going out into the Lake, and there it'll scatter, Heaven
knows where.  Once scattered, it is practically a total loss.  The
salvage wouldn't pay the price of the lumber."

They felt blindly through the rain in the direction of the lights
on the tug and pile-driver.  Shearer, the water dripping from his
flaxen mustache, joined them like a shadow.

"I heard you come in," he explained to Carpenter.  At the river he
announced his opinion.  "We can hold her all right," he assured
them.  "It'll take a few more piles, but by morning the storm'll
be over, and she'll begin to go down again."

The three picked their way over the creaking, swaying timber.  But
when they reached the pile-driver, they found trouble afoot.  The
crew had mutinied, and refused longer to drive piles under the face
of the jam.

"If she breaks loose, she's going to bury us," said they.

"She won't break," snapped Shearer, "get to work."

"It's dangerous," they objected sullenly.

"By God, you get off this driver," shouted Solly.  "Go over and lie
down in a ten-acre lot, and see if you feel safe there!"

He drove them ashore with a storm of profanity and a multitude of
kicks, his steel-blue eyes blazing.

"There's nothing for it but to get the boys out again," said Tim;
"I kinder hate to do it."

But when the Fighting Forty, half asleep but dauntless, took charge
of the driver, a catastrophe made itself known.  One of the ejected
men had tripped the lifting chain of the hammer after another had
knocked away the heavy preventing block, and so the hammer had fallen
into the river and was lost.  None other was to be had.  The pile
driver was useless.

A dozen men were at once despatched for cables, chains, and wire
ropes from the supply at the warehouse.

"I'd like to have those whelps here," cried Shearer,  "I'd throw
them under the jam."

"It's part of the same trick," said Thorpe grimly; "those fellows
have their men everywhere among us.  I don't know whom to trust."

"You think it's Morrison & Daly?" queried Carpenter astonished.

"Think?  I know it.  They know as well as you or I that if we save
these logs, we'll win out in the stock exchange; and they're not
such fools as to let us save them if it can be helped.  I have a
score to settle with those fellows; and when I get through with
this thing I'll settle it all right."

"What are you going to do now?"

"The only thing there is to be done.  We'll string heavy booms,
chained together, between the cribs, and then trust to heaven
they'll hold.  I think we can hold the jam.  The water will begin
to flow over the bank before long, so there won't be much increase
of pressure over what we have now; and as there won't be any shock
to withstand, I think our heavy booms will do the business."

He turned to direct the boring of some long boom logs in preparation
for the chains.  Suddenly he whirled again to Wallace with so strange
an expression in his face that the young man almost cried out.  The
uncertain light of the lanterns showed dimly the streaks of rain
across his countenance, and, his eye flared with a look almost of
panic.

"I never thought of it!" he said in a low voice.  "Fool that I
am!  I don't see how I missed it.  Wallace, don't you see what those
devils will do next?"

"No, what do you mean?" gasped the younger man.

"There are twelve million feet of logs up river in Sadler & Smith's
drive.  Don't you see what they'll do?"

"No, I don't believe---"

"Just as soon as they find out that the river is booming, and that
we are going to have a hard time to hold our jam, they'll let loose
those twelve million on us.  They'll break the jam, or dynamite it,
or something.  And let me tell you, that a very few logs hitting the
tail of our jam will start the whole shooting match so that no power
on earth can stop it."

"I don't imagine they'd think of doing that---" began Wallace by way
of assurance.

"Think of it!  You don't know them.  They've thought of everything.
You don't know that man Daly.  Ask Tim, he'll tell you."

"Well, the---"

"I've got to send a man up there right away.  Perhaps we can get
there in time to head them off.  They have to send their man over--
By the way," he queried, struck with a new idea, "how long have you
been driving piles?"

"Since about three o'clock."

"Six hours," computed Thorpe.  "I wish you'd come for me sooner."

He cast his eye rapidly over the men.

"I don't know just who to send.  There isn't a good enough woodsman
in the lot to make Siscoe Falls through the woods a night like this.
The river trail is too long; and a cut through the woods is blind.
Andrews is the only man I know of who could do it, but I think Billy
Mason said Andrews had gone up on the Gunther track to run lines.
Come on; we'll see."

With infinite difficulty and caution, they reached the shore.
Across the gleaming logs shone dimly the lanterns at the scene
of work, ghostly through the rain.  Beyond, on either side, lay
impenetrable drenched darkness, racked by the wind.

"I wouldn't want to tackle it," panted Thorpe.  "If it wasn't for
that cursed tote road between Sadler's and Daly's, I wouldn't
worry.  It's just too EASY for them."

Behind them the jam cracked and shrieked and groaned.  Occasionally
was heard, beneath the sharper noises, a dull BOOM, as one of the
heavy timbers forced by the pressure from its resting place, shot
into the air, and fell back on the bristling surface.

Andrews had left that morning.

"Tim Shearer might do it," suggested Thorpe, "but I hate to spare
him."

He picked his rifle from its rack and thrust the magazine full of
cartridges.

"Come on, Wallace," said he, "we'll hunt him up."

They stepped again into the shriek and roar of the storm, bending
their heads to its power, but indifferent in the already drenched
condition of their clothing, to the rain.  The saw-dust street was
saturated like a sponge.  They could feel the quick water rise about
the pressure at their feet.  From the invisible houses they heard
a steady monotone of flowing from the roofs.  Far ahead, dim in the
mist, sprayed the light of lanterns.

Suddenly Thorpe felt a touch on his arm.  Faintly he perceived at
his elbow the high lights of a face from which the water streamed.

"Injin Charley!" he cried, "the very man!"



Chapter LIV


Rapidly Thorpe explained what was to be done, and thrust his rifle
into the Indian's hands.  The latter listened in silence and
stolidity, then turned, and without a word departed swiftly in the
darkness.  The two white men stood a minute attentive.  Nothing was
to be heard but the steady beat of rain and the roaring of the wind.

Near the bank of the river they encountered a man, visible only as
an uncertain black outline against the glow of the lanterns beyond.
Thorpe, stopping him, found Big Junko.

"This is no time to quit," said Thorpe, sharply.

"I ain't quittin'," replied Big Junko.

"Where are you going, then?"

Junko was partially and stammeringly unresponsive.

"Looks bad," commented Thorpe.  "You'd better get back to your
job."

"Yes," agreed Junko helplessly.  In the momentary slack tide of
work, the giant had conceived the idea of searching out the driver
crew for purposes of pugilistic vengeance.  Thorpe's suspicions
stung him, but his simple mind could see no direct way to
explanation.

All night long in the chill of a spring rain and windstorm the
Fighting Forty and certain of the mill crew gave themselves to the
labor of connecting the slanting stone cribs so strongly, by means
of heavy timbers chained end to end, that the pressure of a break
in the jam might not sweep aside the defenses.  Wallace Carpenter,
Shorty, the chore-boy, and Anderson, the barn-boss, picked a
dangerous passage back and forth carrying pails of red-hot coffee
which Mrs. Hathaway constantly prepared.  The cold water numbed
the men's hands.  With difficulty could they manipulate the heavy
chains through the auger holes; with pain they twisted knots, bored
holes.  They did not complain.  Behind them the jam quivered,
perilously near the bursting point.  From it shrieked aloud the
demons of pressure.  Steadily the river rose, an inch an hour.
The key might snap at any given moment,they could not tell,--and
with the rush they knew very well that themselves, the tug, and the
disabled piledriver would be swept from existence.  The worst of it
was that the blackness shrouded their experience into uselessness;
they were utterly unable to tell by the ordinary visual symptoms
how near the jam might be to collapse.

However, they persisted, as the old-time riverman always does, so
that when dawn appeared the barrier was continuous and assured.
Although the pressure of the river had already forced the logs
against the defenses, the latter held the strain well.

The storm had settled into its gait.  Overhead the sky was filled
with gray, beneath which darker scuds flew across the zenith before
a howling southwest wind.  Out in the clear river one could hardly
stand upright against the gusts.  In the fan of many directions
furious squalls swept over the open water below the booms, and an
eager boiling current rushed to the lake.

Thorpe now gave orders that the tug and driver should take shelter.
A few moments later he expressed himself as satisfied.  The dripping
crew, their harsh faces gray in the half-light, picked their way to
the shore.

In the darkness of that long night's work no man knew his neighbor.
Men from the river, men from the mill, men from the yard all worked
side by side.  Thus no one noticed especially a tall, slender, but
well-knit individual dressed in a faded mackinaw and a limp slouch
hat which he wore pulled over his eyes.  This young fellow occupied
himself with the chains.  Against the racing current the crew held
the ends of the heavy booms, while he fastened them together.  He
worked well, but seemed slow.  Three times Shearer hustled him on
after the others had finished, examining closely the work that had
been done.  On the third occasion he shrugged his shoulder somewhat
impatiently.

The men straggled to shore, the young fellow just described
bringing up the rear.  He walked as though tired out, hanging his
head and dragging his feet.  When, however, the boarding-house door
had closed on the last of those who preceded him, and the town lay
deserted in the dawn, he suddenly became transformed.  Casting a
keen glance right and left to be sure of his opportunity, he turned
and hurried recklessly back over the logs to the center booms.
There he knelt and busied himself with the chains.

In his zigzag progression over the jam he so blended with the
morning shadows as to seem one of them, and he would have escaped
quite unnoticed had not a sudden shifting of the logs under his
feet compelled him to rise for a moment to his full height.  So
Wallace Carpenter, passing from his bedroom, along the porch, to
the dining room, became aware of the man on the logs.

His first thought was that something demanding instant attention
had happened to the boom.  He therefore ran at once to the man's
assistance, ready to help him personally or to call other aid as
the exigency demanded.  Owing to the precarious nature of the
passage, he could not see beyond his feet until very close to the
workman.  Then he looked up to find the man, squatted on the boom,
contemplating him sardonically.

"Dyer!" he exclaimed

"Right, my son," said the other coolly.

"What are you doing?"

"If you want to know, I am filing this chain."

Wallace made one step forward and so became aware that at last
firearms were taking a part in this desperate game.

"You stand still," commanded Dyer from behind the revolver.  "It's
unfortunate for you that you happened along, because now you'll have
to come with me till this little row is over.  You won't have to stay
long; your logs'll go out in an hour.  I'll just trouble you to go
into the brush with me for a while."

The scaler picked his file from beside the weakened link.

"What have you against us, anyway, Dyer?" asked Wallace.  His quick
mind had conceived a plan.  At the moment, he was standing near the
outermost edge of the jam, but now as he spoke he stepped quietly to
the boom log.

Dyer's black eyes gleamed at him suspiciously, but the movement
appeared wholly natural in view of the return to shore.

"Nothing," he replied.  "I didn't like your gang particularly, but
that's nothing."

"Why do you take such nervy chances to injure us?" queried Carpenter.

"Because there's something in it," snapped the scaler.  "Now about
face; mosey!"

Like a flash Wallace wheeled and dropped into the river, swimming
as fast as possible below water before his breath should give out.
The swift current hurried him away.  When at last he rose for air,
the spit of Dyer's pistol caused him no uneasiness.  A moment later
he struck out boldly for shore.

What Dyer's ultimate plan might be, he could not guess.  He had
stated confidently that the jam would break "in an hour."  He might
intend to start it with dynamite.  Wallace dragged himself from the
water and commenced breathlessly to run toward the boarding-house.

Dyer had already reached the shore.  Wallace raised what was left
of his voice in a despairing shout.  The scaler mockingly waved
his hat, then turned and ran swiftly and easily toward the shelter
of the woods.  At their border he paused again to bow in derision.
Carpenter's cry brought men to the boarding-house door.  From the
shadows of the forest two vivid flashes cut the dusk.  Dyer
staggered, turned completely about, seemed partially to recover,
and disappeared.  An instant later, across the open space where the
scaler had stood, with rifle a-trail, the Indian leaped in pursuit.



Chapter LV


"What is it?"  "What's the matter?"  "What's happened?" burst on
Wallace in a volley.

"It's Dyer," gasped the young man.  "I found him on the boom!  He
held me up with a gun while he filed the boom chains between the
center piers.  They're just ready to go.  I got away by diving.
Hurry and put in a new chain; you haven't much time!"

"He's a gone-er now," interjected Solly grimly.--"Charley is on his
trail--and he is hit."

Thorpe's intelligence leaped promptly to the practical question.

"Injin Charley, where'd he come from?  I sent him up Sadler &
Smith's.  It's twenty miles, even through the woods."

As though by way of colossal answer the whole surface of the jam
moved inward and upward, thrusting the logs bristling against the
horizon.

"She's going to break!" shouted Thorpe, starting on a run towards
the river.  "A chain, quick!"

The men followed, strung high with excitement.  Hamilton, the
journalist, paused long enough to glance up-stream.  Then he, too,
ran after them, screaming that the river above was full of logs.  By
that they all knew that Injin Charley's mission had failed, and that
something under ten million feet of logs were racing down the river
like so many battering rams.

At the boom the great jam was already a-tremble with eagerness to
spring.  Indeed a miracle alone seemed to hold the timbers in their
place.

"It's death, certain death, to go out on that boom," muttered
Billy Mason.

Tim Shearer stepped forward coolly, ready as always to assume the
perilous duty.  He was thrust back by Thorpe, who seized the chain,
cold-shut and hammer which Scotty Parsons brought, and ran lightly
out over the booms, shouting,

"Back! back!  Don't follow me, on your lives!  Keep 'em back, Tim!"

The swift water boiled from under the booms.  BANG! SMASH! BANG!
crashed the logs, a mile upstream, but plainly audible above the
waters and the wind.  Thorpe knelt, dropped the cold-shut through on
either side of the weakened link, and prepared to close it with his
hammer.  He intended further to strengthen the connection with the
other chain.

"Lem' me hold her for you.  You can't close her alone," said an
unexpected voice next his elbow.

Thorpe looked up in surprise and anger.  Over him leaned Big Junko.
The men had been unable to prevent his following.  Animated by the
blind devotion of the animal for its master, and further stung to
action by that master's doubt of his fidelity, the giant had
followed to assist as he might.

"You damned fool," cried Thorpe exasperated, then held the hammer
to him, "strike while I keep the chain underneath," he commanded.

Big Junko leaned forward to obey, kicking strongly his caulks into
the barked surface of the boom log.  The spikes, worn blunt by the
river work already accomplished, failed to grip.  Big Junko slipped,
caught himself by an effort, overbalanced in the other direction,
and fell into the stream.  The current at once swept him away, but
fortunately in such a direction that he was enabled to catch the
slanting end of a "dead head" log whose lower end was jammed in the
crib.  The dead head was slippery, the current strong; Big Junko had
no crevice by which to assure his hold.  In another moment he would
be torn away.

"Let go and swim!" shouted Thorpe.

"I can't swim," replied Junko in so low a voice as to be scarcely
audible.

For a moment Thorpe stared at him.

"Tell Carrie," said Big Junko.

Then there beneath the swirling gray sky, under the frowning jam,
in the midst of flood waters, Thorpe had his second great Moment of
Decision.  He did not pause to weigh reasons or chances, to discuss
with himself expediency, or the moralities of failure.  His actions
were foreordained, mechanical.  All at once the great forces which
the winter had been bringing to power, crystallized into something
bigger than himself or his ideas.  The trail lay before him; there
was no choice.

Now clearly, with no shadow of doubt, he took the other view: There
could be nothing better than Love.  Men, their works, their deeds
were little things.  Success was a little thing; the opinion of men
a little thing.  Instantly he felt the truth of it.

And here was Love in danger.  That it held its moment's habitation
in clay of the coarser mould had nothing to do with the great
elemental truth of it.  For the first time in his life Thorpe
felt the full crushing power of an abstraction.  Without thought,
instinctively, he threw before the necessity of the moment all that
was lesser.  It was the triumph of what was real in the man over
that which environment, alienation, difficulties had raised up
within him.

At Big Junko's words, Thorpe raised his hammer and with one mighty
blow severed the chains which bound the ends of the booms across
the opening.  The free end of one of the poles immediately swung
down with the current in the direction of Big Junko.  Thorpe like
a cat ran to the end of the boom, seized the giant by the collar,
and dragged him through the water to safety.

"Run!" he shouted.  "Run for your life!"

The two started desperately back, skirting the edge of the logs
which now the very seconds alone seemed to hold back.  They were
drenched and blinded with spray, deafened with the crash of timbers
settling to the leap.  The men on shore could no longer see them for
the smother.  The great crush of logs had actually begun its first
majestic sliding motion when at last they emerged to safety.

At first a few of the loose timbers found the opening, slipping
quietly through with the current; then more; finally the front of
the jam dove forward; and an instant later the smooth, swift motion
had gained its impetus and was sweeping the entire drive down
through the gap.

Rank after rank, like soldiers charging, they ran.  The great
fierce wind caught them up ahead of the current.  In a moment the
open river was full of logs jostling eagerly onward.  Then suddenly,
far out above the uneven tossing skyline of Superior, the strange
northern "loom," or mirage, threw the specters of thousands of
restless timbers rising and falling on the bosom of the lake.



Chapter LVI


They stood and watched them go.

"Oh, the great man!  Oh, the great man! murmured the writer,
fascinated.

The grandeur of the sacrifice had struck them dumb.  They did not
understand the motives beneath it all; but the fact was patent.
Big Junko broke down and sobbed.

After a time the stream of logs through the gap slackened.  In a
moment more, save for the inevitably stranded few, the booms were
empty.  A deep sigh went up from the attentive multitude.

"She's GONE!" said one man, with the emphasis of a novel discovery;
and groaned.

Then the awe broke from about their minds, and they spoke many
opinions and speculations.  Thorpe had disappeared.  They respected
his emotion and did not follow him.

"It was just plain damn foolishness;--but it was great!" said
Shearer.  "That no-account jackass of a Big Junko ain't worth as
much per thousand feet as good white pine."

Then they noticed a group of men gathering about the office steps,
and on it someone talking.  Collins, the bookkeeper, was making a
speech.

Collins was a little hatchet-faced man, with straight, lank hair,
nearsighted eyes, a timid, order-loving disposition, and a great
suitability for his profession.  He was accurate, unemotional, and
valuable.  All his actions were as dry as the saw-dust in the burner.
No one had ever seen him excited.  But he was human; and now his
knowledge of the Company's affairs showed him the dramatic contrast.
HE KNEW!  He knew that the property of the firm had been mortgaged
to the last dollar in order to assist expansion, so that not another
cent could be borrowed to tide over present difficulty.  He knew that
the notes for sixty thousand dollars covering the loan to Wallace
Carpenter came due in three months; he knew from the long table of
statistics which he was eternally preparing and comparing that the
season's cut should have netted a profit of two hundred thousand
dollars--enough to pay the interest on the mortgages, to take up the
notes, and to furnish a working capital for the ensuing year.  These
things he knew in the strange concrete arithmetical manner of the
routine bookkeeper.  Other men saw a desperate phase of firm rivalry;
he saw a struggle to the uttermost.  Other men cheered a rescue: he
thrilled over the magnificent gesture of the Gambler scattering his
stake in largesse to Death.

It was the simple turning of the hand from full breathed prosperity
to lifeless failure.

His view was the inverse of his master's.  To Thorpe it had suddenly
become a very little thing in contrast to the great, sweet elemental
truth that the dream girl had enunciated.  To Collins the affair was
miles vaster than the widest scope of his own narrow life.

The firm could not take up its notes when they came due; it could
not pay the interest on the mortgages, which would now be foreclosed;
it could not even pay in full the men who had worked for it--that
would come under a court's adjudication.

He had therefore watched Thorpe's desperate sally to mend the
weakened chain, in all the suspense of a man whose entire universe
is in the keeping of the chance moment.  It must be remembered that
at bottom, below the outer consciousness, Thorpe's final decision had
already grown to maturity.  On the other hand, no other thought than
that of accomplishment had even entered the little bookkeeper's head.
The rescue and all that it had meant had hit him like a stroke of
apoplexy, and his thin emotions had curdled to hysteria.  Full of
the idea he appeared before the men.

With rapid, almost incoherent speech he poured it out to them.
Professional caution and secrecy were forgotten.  Wallace Carpenter
attempted to push through the ring for the purpose of stopping him.
A gigantic riverman kindly but firmly held him back.

"I guess it's just as well we hears this," said the latter.

It all came out--the loan to Carpenter, with a hint at the motive:
the machinations of the rival firm on the Board of Trade; the
notes, the mortgages, the necessity of a big season's cut; the
reasons the rival firm had for wishing to prevent that cut from
arriving at the market; the desperate and varied means they had
employed.  The men listened silent.  Hamilton, his eyes glowing
like coals, drank in every word.  Here was the master motive he
had sought; here was the story great to his hand!

"That's what we ought to get," cried Collins, almost weeping, "and
now we've gone and bust, just because that infernal river-hog had
to fall off a boom.  By God, it's a shame!  Those scalawags have
done us after all!"

Out from the shadows of the woods stole Injin Charley.  The whole
bearing and aspect of the man had changed.  His eye gleamed with a
distant farseeing fire of its own, which took no account of anything
but some remote vision.  He stole along almost furtively, but with
a proud upright carriage of his neck, a backward tilt of his fine
head, a distention of his nostrils that lent to his appearance a
panther-like pride and stealthiness.  No one saw him.  Suddenly he
broke through the group and mounted the steps beside Collins.

"The enemy of my brother is gone," said he simply in his native
tongue, and with a sudden gesture held out before them--a scalp.

The medieval barbarity of the thing appalled them for a moment.  The
days of scalping were long since past, had been closed away between
the pages of forgotten histories, and yet here again before them
was the thing in all its living horror.  Then a growl arose.  The
human animal had tasted blood.

All at once like wine their wrongs mounted to their heads.  They
remembered their dead comrades.  They remembered the heart-breaking
days and nights of toil they had endured on account of this man and
his associates.  They remembered the words of Collins, the little
bookkeeper.  They hated.  They shook their fists across the skies.
They turned and with one accord struck back for the railroad right-
of-way which led to Shingleville, the town controlled by Morrison
& Daly.

The railroad lay for a mile straight through a thick tamarack swamp,
then over a nearly treeless cranberry plain.  The tamarack was a
screen between the two towns.  When half-way through the swamp,
Red Jacket stopped, removed his coat, ripped the lining from it,
and began to fashion a rude mask.

"Just as well they don't recognize us," said he.

"Somebody in town will give us away," suggested Shorty, the chore-boy.

"No, they won't; they're all here," assured Kerlie.

It was true.  Except for the women and children, who were not yet
about, the entire village had assembled.  Even old Vanderhoof, the
fire-watcher of the yard, hobbled along breathlessly on his rheumatic
legs.  In a moment the masks were fitted.  In a moment more the
little band had emerged from the shelter of the swamp, and so came
into full view of its objective point.

Shingleville consisted of a big mill; the yards, now nearly empty
of lumber; the large frame boarding-house; the office; the stable;
a store; two saloons; and a dozen dwellings.  The party at once
fixed its eyes on this collection of buildings, and trudged on down
the right-of-way with unhastening grimness.

Their approach was not unobserved.  Daly saw them; and Baker, his
foreman, saw them.  The two at once went forth to organize opposition.
When the attacking party reached the mill-yard, it found the boss
and the foreman standing alone on the saw-dust, revolvers drawn.

Daly traced a line with his toe.

"The first man that crosses that line gets it," said he.

They knew he meant what he said.  An instant's pause ensued, while
the big man and the little faced a mob.  Daly's rivermen were still
on drive.  He knew the mill men too well to depend on them.  Truth
to tell, the possibility of such a raid as this had not occurred to
him; for the simple reason that he did not anticipate the discovery
of his complicity with the forces of nature.  Skillfully carried out,
the plan was a good one.  No one need know of the weakened link, and
it was the most natural thing in the world that Sadler & Smith's
drive should go out with the increase of water.

The men grouped swiftly and silently on the other side of the
sawdust line.  The pause did not mean that Daly's defense was good.
I have known of a crew of striking mill men being so bluffed down,
but not such men as these.

"Do you know what's going to happen to you?" said a voice from the
group.  The speaker was Radway, but the contractor kept himself well
in the background.  "We're going to burn your mill; we're going to
burn your yards; we're going to burn your whole shooting match, you
low-lived whelp!"

"Yes, and we're going to string you to your own trestle!" growled
another voice harshly.

"Dyer!" said Injin Charley, simply, shaking the wet scalp arm's
length towards the lumbermen.

At this grim interruption a silence fell.  The owner paled slightly;
his foreman chewed a nonchalant straw.  Down the still and deserted
street crossed and recrossed the subtle occult influences of a half-
hundred concealed watchers.  Daly and his subordinate were very much
alone, and very much in danger.  Their last hour had come; and they
knew it.

With the recognition of the fact, they immediately raised their
weapons in the resolve to do as much damage as possible before
being overpowered.

Then suddenly, full in the back, a heavy stream of water knocked
them completely off their feet, rolled them over and over on the
wet sawdust, and finally jammed them both against the trestle,
where it held them, kicking and gasping for breath, in a choking
cataract of water.  The pistols flew harmlessly into the air.  For
an instant the Fighting Forty stared in paralyzed astonishment.
Then a tremendous roar of laughter saluted this easy vanquishment
of a formidable enemy.

Daly and Baker were pounced upon and captured.  There was no
resistance.  They were too nearly strangled for that.  Little
Solly and old Vanderhoof turned off the water in the fire hydrant
and disconnected the hose they had so effectively employed.

"There, damn you!" said Rollway Charley, jerking the millman to
his feet.  "How do YOU like too much water? hey?"

The unexpected comedy changed the party's mood.

It was no longer a question of killing.  A number broke into the
store, and shortly emerged, bearing pails of kerosene with which
they deluged the slabs on the windward side of the mill.  The flames
caught the structure instantly.  A thousand sparks, borne by the
off-shore breeze, fastened like so many stinging insects on the
lumber in the yard.

It burned as dried balsam thrown on a camp fire.  The heat of it
drove the onlookers far back in the village, where in silence they
watched the destruction.  From behind locked doors the inhabitants
watched with them.

The billow of white smoke filled the northern sky.  A whirl of gray
wood ashes, light as air, floated on and ever on over Superior.  The
site of the mill, the squares where the piles of lumber had stood,
glowed incandescence over which already a white film was forming.

Daly and his man were slapped and cuffed hither and thither at the
men's will.  Their faces bled, their bodies ached as one bruise.

"That squares us," said the men.  "If we can't cut this year,
neither kin you.  It's up to you now!"

Then, like a destroying horde of locusts, they gutted the office
and the store, smashing what they could not carry to the fire.  The
dwellings and saloons they did not disturb.  Finally, about noon,
they kicked their two prisoners into the river, and took their way
stragglingly back along the right-of-way.

"I surmise we took that town apart SOME!" remarked Shorty with
satisfaction.

"I should rise to remark," replied Kerlie.  Big Junko said nothing,
but his cavernous little animal eyes glowed with satisfaction.  He
had been the first to lay hands on Daly; he had helped to carry the
petroleum; he had struck the first match; he had even administered
the final kick.

At the boarding-house they found Wallace Carpenter and Hamilton
seated on the veranda.  It was now afternoon.  The wind had abated
somewhat, and the sun was struggling with the still flying scuds.

"Hello, boys," said Wallace, "been for a little walk in the woods?"

"Yes, sir," replied Jack Hyland, "we---"

"I'd rather not hear," interrupted Wallace.  "There's quite a fire
over east.  I suppose you haven't noticed it."

Hyland looked gravely eastward.

"Sure 'nough!" said he.

"Better get some grub," suggested Wallace.

After the men had gone in, he turned to the journalist.

"Hamilton," he began, "write all you know about the drive, and
the break, and the rescue, but as to the burning of the mill---"

The other held out his hand.

"Good," said Wallace offering his own.

And that was as far as the famous Shingleville raid ever got.  Daly
did his best to collect even circumstantial evidence against the
participants, but in vain.  He could not even get anyone to say that
a single member of the village of Carpenter had absented himself
from town that morning.  This might have been from loyalty, or it
might have been from fear of the vengeance the Fighting Forty would
surely visit on a traitor.  Probably it was a combination of both.
The fact remains, however, that Daly never knew surely of but one
man implicated in the destruction of his plant.  That man was Injin
Charley, but Injin Charley promptly disappeared.

After an interval, Tim Shearer, Radway and Kerlie came out again.

"Where's the boss?" asked Shearer.

"I don't know, Tim," replied Wallace seriously.

"I've looked everywhere.  He's gone.  He must have been all cut up.
I think he went out in the woods to get over it.  I am not worrying.
Harry has lots of sense.  He'll come in about dark."

"Sure!" said Tim.

"How about the boy's stakes?" queried Radway.  "I hear this is a
bad smash for the firm."

"We'll see that the men get their wages all right," replied
Carpenter, a little disappointed that such a question should be
asked at such a time.

"All right," rejoined the contractor.  "We're all going to need
our money this summer."



Chapter LVII


Thorpe walked through the silent group of men without seeing
them.  He had no thought for what he had done, but for the
triumphant discovery he had made in spite of himself.  This he
saw at once as something to glory in and as a duty to be fulfilled.

It was then about six o'clock in the morning.  Thorpe passed the
boarding-house, the store, and the office, to take himself as far
as the little open shed that served the primitive town as a railway
station.  There he set the semaphore to flag the east-bound train
from Duluth.  At six thirty-two, the train happening on time, he
climbed aboard.  He dropped heavily into a seat and stared straight
in front of him until the conductor had spoken to him twice.

"Where to, Mr. Thorpe?" he asked.

The latter gazed at him uncomprehendingly.

"Oh! Mackinaw City," he replied at last.

"How're things going up your way?" inquired the conductor by way of
conversation while he made out the pay-slip.

"Good!" responded Thorpe mechanically.

The act of paying for his fare brought to his consciousness that he
had but a little over ten dollars with him.  He thrust the change
back into his pocket, and took up his contemplation of nothing.  The
river water dripped slowly from his "cork" boots to form a pool on
the car floor.  The heavy wool of his short driving trousers steamed
in the car's warmth.  His shoulders dried in a little cloud of vapor.
He noticed none of these things, but stared ahead, his gaze vacant,
the bronze of his face set in the lines of a brown study, his strong
capable hands hanging purposeless between his knees.  The ride to
Mackinaw City was six hours long, and the train in addition lost some
ninety minutes; but in all this distance Thorpe never altered his
pose nor his fixed attitude of attention to some inner voice.

The car-ferry finally landed them on the southern peninsula.  Thorpe
descended at Mackinaw City to find that the noon train had gone.  He
ate lunch at the hotel,--borrowed a hundred dollars from the agent
of Louis Sands, a lumberman of his acquaintance; and seated himself
rigidly in the little waiting room, there to remain until the nine-
twenty that night.  When the cars were backed down from the siding,
he boarded the sleeper.  In the doorway stood a disapproving colored
porter.

"Yo'll fin' the smokin' cab up fo'wu'd, suh," said the latter, firmly
barring the way.

"It's generally forward," answered Thorpe.

"This yeah's th' sleepah," protested the functionary.  "You pays
extry."

"I am aware of it," replied Thorpe curtly.  "Give me a lower."

"Yessah!" acquiesced the darkey, giving way, but still in doubt.  He
followed Thorpe curiously, peering into the smoking room on him from
time to time.  A little after twelve his patience gave out.  The
stolid gloomy man of lower six seemed to intend sitting up all night.

Yo' berth is ready, sah," he delicately suggested.

Thorpe arose obediently, walked to lower six, and, without undressing,
threw himself on the bed.  Afterwards the porter, in conscientious
discharge of his duty, looked diligently beneath the seat for boots
to polish.  Happening to glance up, after fruitless search he
discovered the boots still adorning the feet of their owner.

"Well, for th' LANDS sake!" ejaculated the scandalized negro, beating
a hasty retreat.

He was still more scandalized when, the following noon, his strange
fare brushed by him without bestowing the expected tip.

Thorpe descended at Twelfth Street in Chicago without any very clear
notion of where he was going.  For a moment he faced the long park-
like expanse of the lake front, then turned sharp to his left and
picked his way south up the interminable reaches of Michigan Avenue.
He did this without any conscious motive--mainly because the reaches
seemed interminable, and he proved the need of walking.  Block after
block he clicked along, the caulks of his boots striking fire from
the pavement.  Some people stared at him a little curiously.  Others
merely glanced in his direction, attracted more by the expression of
his face than the peculiarity of his dress.  At that time rivermen
were not an uncommon sight along the water front.

After an interval he seemed to have left the smoke and dirt behind.
The street became quieter.  Boarding-houses and tailors' shops
ceased.  Here and there appeared a bit of lawn, shrubbery, flowers.
The residences established an uptown crescendo of magnificence.
Policemen seemed trimmer, better-gloved.  Occasionally he might have
noticed in front of one of the sandstone piles, a besilvered pair
champing before a stylish vehicle.  By and by he came to himself
to find that he was staring at the deep-carved lettering in a stone
horse-block before a large dwelling.

His mind took the letters in one after the other, perceiving them
plainly before it accorded them recognition.  Finally he had
completed the word "Farrad."  He whirled sharp on his heel, mounted
the broad white stone steps, and rang the bell.

It was answered almost immediately by a cleanshaven, portly and
dignified man with the most impassive countenance in the world.
This man looked upon Thorpe with lofty disapproval.

"Is Miss Hilda Farrand at home?" he asked.

"I cannot say," replied the man.  "If you will step to the back door,
I will ascertain."

"The flowers will do.  Now see that the south room is ready, Annie,"
floated a voice from within.

Without a word, but with a deadly earnestness, Thorpe reached
forward, seized the astonished servant by the collar, yanked him
bodily outside the door, stepped inside, and strode across the hall
toward a closed portiere whence had come the voice.  The riverman's
long spikes cut little triangular pieces from the hardwood floor.
Thorpe did not notice that.  He thrust aside the portiere.

Before him he saw a young and beautiful girl.  She was seated, and
her lap was filled with flowers.  At his sudden apparition, her
hands flew to her heart, and her lips slightly parted.  For a second
the two stood looking at each other, just as nearly a year before
their eyes had crossed over the old pole trail.

To Thorpe the girl seemed more beautiful than ever.  She exceeded
even his retrospective dreams of her, for the dream had persistently
retained something of the quality of idealism which made the vision
unreal, while the woman before him had become human flesh and blood,
adorable, to be desired.  The red of this violent unexpected encounter
rushed to her face, her bosom rose and fell in a fluttering catch
for breath; but her eyes were steady and inquiring.

Then the butter pounced on Thorpe from behind with the intent to do
great bodily harm.

"Morris!" commanded Hilda sharply, "what are you doing?"

The man cut short his heroism in confusion.

"You may go," concluded Hilda.

Thorpe stood straight and unwinking by the straight portiere.  After
a moment he spoke.

"I have come to tell you that you were right and I was wrong,"
said he steadily.  "You told me there could be nothing better than
love.  In the pride of my strength I told you this was not so.  I
was wrong."

He stood for another instant, looking directly at her, then turned
sharply, and head erect walked from the room.

Before he had reached the outer door the girl was at his side.

"Why are you going?" she asked.

"I have nothing more to say."

"NOTHING?"

"Nothing at all."

She laughed happily to herself.

"But I have--much.  Come back."

They returned to the little morning room, Thorpe's caulked boots
gouging out the little triangular furrows in the hardwood floor.
Neither noticed that.  Morris, the butler, emerged from his hiding
and held up the hands of horror.

"What are you going to do now?" she catechised, facing him in the
middle of the room.  A long tendril of her beautiful corn-silk
hair fell across her eyes; her red lips parted in a faint wistful
smile; beneath the draperies of her loose gown the pure slender
lines of her figure leaned toward him.

"I am going back," he replied patiently.

"I knew you would come," said she.  "I have been expecting you."

She raised one hand to brush back the tendril of hair, but it was
a mechanical gesture, one that did not stir even the surface
consciousness of the strange half-smiling, half-wistful, starry
gaze with which she watched his face.

"Oh, Harry," she breathed, with a sudden flash of insight, "you
are a man born to be much misunderstood."

He held himself rigid, but in his veins was creeping a molten fire,
and the fire was beginning to glow dully in his eye.  Her whole being
called him.  His heart leaped, his breath came fast, his eyes swam.
With almost hypnotic fascination the idea obsessed him--to kiss her
lips, to press the soft body of the young girl, to tumble her hair
down about her flower face.  He had not come for this.  He tried to
steady himself, and by an effort that left him weak he succeeded.
Then a new flood of passion overcame him.  In the later desire was
nothing of the old humble adoration.  It was elemental, real, almost
a little savage.  He wanted to seize her so fiercely as to hurt her.
Something caught his throat, filled his lungs, weakened his knees.
For a moment it seemed to him that he was going to faint.

And still she stood there before him, saying nothing, leaning
slightly towards him, her red lips half parted, her eyes fixed
almost wistfully on his face.

"Go away!" he whispered hoarsely at last.  The voice was not his
own.  "Go away!  Go away!"

Suddenly she swayed to him.

"Oh, Harry, Harry," she whispered, "must I TELL you?  Don't you SEE?"

The flood broke through him.  He seized her hungrily.  He crushed her
to him until she gasped; he pressed his lips against hers until she
all but cried out with the pain of it, he ran his great brown hands
blindly through her hair until it came down about them both in a
cloud of spun light.

"Tell me!" he whispered.  "Tell me!"

"Oh! Oh!" she cried.  "Please! What is it?"

"I do not believe it," he murmured savagely.

She drew herself from him with gentle dignity.

"I am not worthy to say it," she said soberly, "but I love you with
all my heart and soul!"

Then for the first and only time in his life Thorpe fell to weeping,
while she, understanding, stood by and comforted him.



Chapter LVIII


The few moments of Thorpe's tears eased the emotional strain under
which, perhaps unconsciously, he had been laboring for nearly a year
past.  The tenseness of his nerves relaxed.  He was able to look
on the things about him from a broader standpoint than that of the
specialist, to front life with saving humor.  The deep breath after
striving could at last be taken.

In this new attitude there was nothing strenuous, nothing demanding
haste; only a deep glow of content and happiness.  He savored
deliberately the joy of a luxurious couch, rich hangings, polished
floor, subdued light, warmed atmosphere.  He watched with soul-deep
gratitude the soft girlish curves of Hilda's body, the poise of her
flower head, the piquant, half-wistful, half-childish set of her red
lips, the clear starlike glimmer of her dusky eyes.  It was all near
to him; his.

"Kiss me, dear," he said.

She swayed to him again, deliciously graceful, deliciously
unselfconscious, trusting, adorable.  Already in the little
nothingnesses of manner, the trifles of mental and bodily attitude,
she had assumed that faint trace of the maternal which to the
observant tells so plainly that a woman has given herself to a man.

She leaned her cheek against her hand, and her hand against his
shoulder.

"I have been reading a story lately," said she, "that has interested
me very much.  It was about a man who renounced all he held most dear
to shield a friend."

"Yes," said Thorpe.

"Then he renounced all his most valuable possessions because a poor
common man needed the sacrifice."

"Sounds like a medieval story," said he with unconscious humor.

"It happened recently," rejoined Hilda.  "I read it in the papers."

"Well, he blazed a good trail," was Thorpe's sighing comment.
"Probably he had his chance.  We don't all of us get that.  Things
go crooked and get tangled up, so we have to do the best we can.  I
don't believe I'd have done it."

"Oh, you are delicious!" she cried.

After a time she said very humbly: "I want to beg your pardon for
misunderstanding you and causing you so much suffering.  I was very
stupid, and didn't see why you could not do as I wanted you to."

"That is nothing to forgive.  I acted like a fool."

"I have known about you," she went on.  "It has all come out in
the Telegram.  It has been very exciting.  Poor boy, you look tired."

He straightened himself suddenly.  "I have forgotten,--actually
forgotten," he cried a little bitterly.  "Why, I am a pauper, a
bankrupt, I---"

"Harry," she interrupted gently, but very firmly, "you must not
say what you were going to say.  I cannot allow it.  Money came
between us before.  It must not do so again.  Am I not right, dear?"

She smiled at him with the lips of a child and the eyes of a woman.

"Yes," he agreed after a struggle, "you are right.  But now I must
begin all over again.  It will be a long time before I shall be able
to claim you.  I have my way to make."

"Yes," said she diplomatically.

"But you!" he cried suddenly.  "The papers remind me.  How about
that Morton?"

"What about him?" asked the girl, astonished.  "He is very happily
engaged."

Thorpe's face slowly filled with blood.

"You'll break the engagement at once," he commanded a little harshly.

"Why should I break the engagement?" demanded Hilda, eying him with
some alarm.

"I should think it was obvious enough."

"But it isn't," she insisted.  "Why?"

Thorpe was silent--as he always had been in emergencies, and as he
was destined always to be.  His was not a nature of expression, but
of action.  A crisis always brought him, like a bull-dog, silently
to the grip.

Hilda watched him puzzled, with bright eyes, like a squirrel.  Her
quick brain glanced here and there among the possibilities, seeking
the explanation.  Already she knew better than to demand it of him.

"You actually don't think he's engaged to ME!" she burst out finally.

"Isn't he?" asked Thorpe.

"Why no, stupid!  He's engaged to Elizabeth Carpenter, Wallace's
sister.  Now WHERE did you get that silly idea?"

"I saw it in the paper."

"And you believe all you see!  Why didn't you ask Wallace--but of
course you wouldn't!  Harry, you are the most incoherent dumb old
brute I ever saw!  I could shake you!  Why don't you say something
occasionally when it's needed, instead of sitting dumb as a sphinx
and getting into all sorts of trouble?  But you never will.  I know
you.  You dear old bear!  You NEED a wife to interpret things for
you.  You speak a different language from most people."  She said
this between laughing and crying; between a sense of the ridiculous
uselessness of withholding a single timely word, and a tender
pathetic intuition of the suffering such a nature must endure.  In
the prospect of the future she saw her use.  It gladdened her and
filled her with a serene happiness possible only to those who feel
themselves a necessary and integral part in the lives of the ones
they love.  Dimly she perceived this truth.  Dimly beyond it she
glimpsed that other great truth of nature, that the human being is
rarely completely efficient alone, that in obedience to his greater
use he must take to himself a mate before he can succeed.

Suddenly she jumped to her feet with an exclamation.

"Oh, Harry!  I'd forgotten utterly!" she cried in laughing
consternation.  "I have a luncheon here at half-past one!  It's
almost that now.  I must run and dress.  Just look at me; just
LOOK!  YOU did that!"

"I'll wait here until the confounded thing is over," said Thorpe.

"Oh, no, you won't," replied Hilda decidedly.  "You are going down
town right now and get something to put on.  Then you are coming
back here to stay."

Thorpe glanced in surprise at his driver's clothes, and his spiked
boots.

"Heavens and earth!" he exclaimed, "I should think so!  How am I to
get out without ruining the floor?"

Hilda laughed and drew aside the portiere.

"Don't you think you have done that pretty well already?" she asked.
"There, don't look so solemn.  We're not going to be sorry for a
single thing we've done today, are we?"  She stood close to him
holding the lapels of his jacket in either hand, searching his face
wistfully with her fathomless dusky eyes.

"No, sweetheart, we are not," replied Thorpe soberly.



Chapter LIX


Surely it is useless to follow the sequel in detail, to tell how
Hilda persuaded Thorpe to take her money.  She aroused skillfully
his fighting blood, induced him to use one fortune to rescue another.
To a woman such as she this was not a very difficult task in the
long run.  A few scruples of pride; that was all.

"Do not consider its being mine," she answered to his objections.
"Remember the lesson we learned so bitterly.  Nothing can be greater
than love, not even our poor ideals.  You have my love; do not
disappoint me by refusing so little a thing as my money."

"I hate to do it," he replied; "it doesn't look right."

"You must," she insisted.  "I will not take the position of rich
wife to a poor man; it is humiliating to both.  I will not marry
you until you have made your success."

"That is right," said Thorpe heartily.

"Well, then, are you going to be so selfish as to keep me waiting
while you make an entirely new start, when a little help on my part
will bring your plans to completion?"

She saw the shadow of assent in his eyes.

"How much do you need?" she asked swiftly.

"I must take up the notes," he explained.  "I must pay the men.  I
may need something on the stock market.  If I go in on this thing,
I'm going in for keeps.  I'll get after those fellows who have been
swindling Wallace.  Say a hundred thousand dollars."

"Why, it's nothing," she cried.

"I'm glad you think so," he replied grimly.

She ran to her dainty escritoire, where she scribbled eagerly for a
few moments.

"There," she cried, her eyes shining, "there is my check book all
signed in blank.  I'll see that the money is there."

Thorpe took the book, staring at it with sightless eyes.  Hilda,
perched on the arm of his chair, watched his face closely, as later
became her habit of interpretation.

"What is it?" she asked.

Thorpe looked up with a pitiful little smile that seemed to beg
indulgence for what he was about to say.

"I was just thinking, dear.  I used to imagine I was a strong man,
yet see how little my best efforts amount to.  I have put myself
into seven years of the hardest labor, working like ten men in
order to succeed.  I have foreseen all that mortal could foresee.
I have always thought, and think now, that a man is no man unless
he works out the sort of success for which he is fitted.  I have
done fairly well until the crises came.  Then I have been absolutely
powerless, and if left to myself, I would have failed.  At the times
when a really strong man would have used effectively the strength he
had been training, I have fallen back miserably on outer aid.  Three
times my affairs have become critical.  In the crises I have been
saved, first by a mere boy; then by an old illiterate man; now by
a weak woman!"

She heard him through in silence.

"Harry," she said soberly when he had quite finished, "I agree
with you that God meant the strong man to succeed; that without
success the man hasn't fulfilled his reason for being.  But, Harry,
ARE YOU QUITE SURE GOD MEANT HIM TO SUCCEED ALONE?"

The dusk fell through the little room.  Out in the hallway a tall
clock ticked solemnly.  A noiseless servant appeared in the doorway
to light the lamps, but was silently motioned away.

"I had not thought of that," said Thorpe at last.

"You men are so selfish," went on Hilda.  "You would take everything
from us.  Why can't you leave us the poor little privilege of the
occasional deciding touch, the privilege of succor.  It is all that
weakness can do for strength."

"And why," she went on after a moment, "why is not that, too, a
part of a man's success--the gathering about him of people who can
and will supplement his efforts.  Who was it inspired Wallace
Carpenter with confidence in an unknown man?  You.  What did it?
Those very qualities by which you were building your success.  Why
did John Radway join forces with you?  How does it happen that your
men are of so high a standard of efficiency?  Why am I willing to
give you everything, EVERYTHING, to my heart and soul?  Because it
is you who ask it.  Because you, Harry Thorpe, have woven us into
your fortune, so that we have no choice.  Depend upon us in the
crises of your work!  Why, so are you dependent on your ten fingers,
your eyes, the fiber of your brain!  Do you think the less of your
fulfillment for that?"

So it was that Hilda Farrand gave her lover confidence, brought him
out from his fanaticism, launched him afresh into the current of
events.  He remained in Chicago all that summer, giving orders that
all work at the village of Carpenter should cease.  With his affairs
that summer we have little to do.  His common-sense treatment of the
stock market, by which a policy of quiescence following an outright
buying of the stock which he had previously held on margins, retrieved
the losses already sustained, and finally put both partners on a
firm financial footing.  That is another story.  So too is his
reconciliation with and understanding of his sister.  It came
about through Hilda, of course.  Perhaps in the inscrutable way of
Providence the estrangement was of benefit,--even necessary,for it
had thrown him entirely within himself during his militant years.

Let us rather look to the end of the summer.  It now became a
question of re-opening the camps.  Thorpe wrote to Shearer and
Radway, whom he had retained, that he would arrive on Saturday
noon, and suggested that the two begin to look about for men.
Friday, himself, Wallace Carpenter, Elizabeth Carpenter, Morton,
Helen Thorpe, and Hilda Farrand boarded the north-bound train.



Chapter LX


The train of the South Shore Railroad shot its way across the
broad reaches of the northern peninsula.  On either side of the
right-of-way lay mystery in the shape of thickets so dense and
overgrown that the eye could penetrate them but a few feet at
most.  Beyond them stood the forests.  Thus Nature screened her
intimacies from the impertinent eye of a new order of things.

Thorpe welcomed the smell of the northland.  He became almost eager,
explaining, indicating to the girl at his side.

"There is the Canada balsam," he cried.  "Do you remember how I
showed it to you first?  And yonder the spruce.  How stuck up your
teeth were when you tried to chew the gum before it had been heated.
Do you remember?  Look! Look there!  It's a white pine!  Isn't it
a grand tree?  It's the finest tree in the forest, by my way of
thinking, so tall, so straight, so feathery, and so dignified.  See,
Hilda, look quick!  There's an old logging road all filled with
raspberry vines.  We'd find lots of partridges there, and perhaps
a bear.  Wouldn't you just like to walk down it about sunset?"

"Yes, Harry."

"I wonder what we're stopping for.  Seems to me they are stopping
at every squirrel's trail.  Oh, this must be Seney.  Yes, it is.
Queer little place, isn't it? but sort of attractive.  Good deal
like our town.  You have never seen Carpenter, have you?  Location's
fine, anyway; and to me it's sort of picturesque.  You'll like Mrs.
Hathaway.  She's a buxom, motherly woman who runs the boarding-house
for eighty men, and still finds time to mend my clothes for me.  And
you'll like Solly.  Solly's the tug captain, a mighty good fellow,
true as a gun barrel.  We'll have him take us out, some still day.
We'll be there in a few minutes now.  See the cranberry marshes.
Sometimes there's a good deal of pine on little islands scattered
over it, but it's very hard to log, unless you get a good winter.
We had just such a proposition when I worked for Radway.  Oh, you'll
like Radway, he's as good as gold.  Helen!"

"Yes," replied his sister.

"I want you to know Radway.  He's the man who gave me my start."

"All right, Harry," laughed Helen.  "I'll meet anybody or anything
from bears to Indians."

"I know an Indian too--Geezigut, an Ojibwa--we called him Injin
Charley.  He was my first friend in the north woods.  He helped me
get my timber.  This spring he killed a man--a good job, too--and
is hiding now.  I wish I knew where he is.  But we'll see him some
day.  He'll come back when the thing blows over.  See!  See!"

"What?" they all asked, breathless.

"It's gone.  Over beyond the hills there I caught a glimpse of
Superior."

"You are ridiculous, Harry," protested Helen Thorpe laughingly.  "I
never saw you so.  You are a regular boy!"

"Do you like boys?" he asked gravely of Hilda.

"Adore them!" she cried.

"All right, I don't care," he answered his sister in triumph.

The air brakes began to make themselves felt, and shortly the train
came to a grinding stop.

"What station is this?" Thorpe asked the colored porter.

"Shingleville, sah," the latter replied.

"I thought so.  Wallace, when did their mill burn, anyway?  I haven't
heard about it."

"Last spring, about the time you went down."

"Is THAT so?  How did it happen?"

"They claim incendiarism," parried Wallace cautiously.

Thorpe pondered a moment, then laughed.  "I am in the mixed attitude
of the small boy," he observed, "who isn't mean enough to wish
anybody's property destroyed, but who wishes that if there is a
fire, to be where he can see it.  I am sorry those fellows had to
lose their mill, but it was a good thing for us.  The man who set
that fire did us a good turn.  If it hadn't been for the burning of
their mill, they would have made a stronger fight against us in
the stock market."

Wallace and Hilda exchanged glances.  The girl was long since aware
of the inside history of those days.

"You'll have to tell them that," she whispered over the back of
her seat.  "It will please them."

"Our station is next!" cried Thorpe, "and it's only a little ways.
Come, get ready!"

They all crowded into the narrow passage-way near the door, for the
train barely paused.

"All right, sah," said the porter, swinging down his little step.

Thorpe ran down to help the ladies.  He was nearly taken from
his feet by a wild-cat yell, and a moment later that result was
actually accomplished by a rush of men that tossed him bodily onto
its shoulders.  At the same moment, the mill and tug whistles began
to screech, miscellaneous fire-arms exploded.  Even the locomotive
engineer, in the spirit of the occasion, leaned down heartily on
his whistle rope.  The saw-dust street was filled with screaming,
jostling men.  The homes of the town were brilliantly draped with
cheesecloth, flags and bunting.

For a moment Thorpe could not make out what had happened.  This
turmoil was so different from the dead quiet of desertion he had
expected, that he was unable to gather his faculties.  All about him
were familiar faces upturned to his own.  He distinguished the broad,
square shoulders of Scotty Parsons, Jack Hyland, Kerlie, Bryan
Moloney; Ellis grinned at him from the press; Billy Camp, the fat
and shiny drive cook; Mason, the foreman of the mill; over beyond
howled Solly, the tug captain, Rollway Charley, Shorty, the
chore-boy; everywhere were features that he knew.  As his dimming
eyes travelled here and there, one by one the Fighting Forty,
the best crew of men ever gathered in the northland, impressed
themselves on his consciousness.  Saginaw birlers, Flat River
drivers, woodsmen from the forests of Lower Canada, bully boys
out of the Muskegon waters, peavey men from Au Sable, white-water
dare-devils from the rapids of the Menominee--all were there to
do him honor, him in whom they had learned to see the supreme
qualities of their calling.  On the outskirts sauntered the tall
form of Tim Shearer, a straw peeping from beneath his flax-white
mustache, his eyes glimmering under his flax-white eyebrows.  He did
not evidence as much excitement as the others, but the very bearing
of the man expressed the deepest satisfaction.  Perhaps he remembered
that zero morning so many years before when he had watched the
thinly-clad, shivering chore-boy set his face for the first time
towards the dark forest.

Big Junko and Anderson deposited their burden on the raised platform
of the office steps.  Thorpe turned and fronted the crowd.

At once pandemonium broke loose, as though the previous performance
had been nothing but a low-voiced rehearsal.

The men looked upon their leader and gave voice to the enthusiasm
that was in them.  He stood alone there, straight and tall, the
muscles of his brown face set to hide his emotion, his head thrust
back proudly, the lines of his strong figure tense with power,--the
glorification in finer matter of the hardy, reliant men who did him
honor.

"Oh, aren't you PROUD of him?" gasped Hilda, squeezing Helen's arm
with a little sob.

In a moment Wallace Carpenter, his countenance glowing with pride
and pleasure, mounted the platform and stood beside his friend,
while Morton and the two young ladies stopped half way up the steps.

At once the racket ceased.  Everyone stood at attention.

"Mr. Thorpe," Wallace began, "at the request of your friends here,
I have a most pleasant duty to fulfill.  They have asked me to tell
you how glad they are to see you; that is surely unnecessary.  They
have also asked me to congratulate you on having won the fight with
our rivals."

"You done 'em good."  "Can't down the Old Fellow," muttered joyous
voices.

"But," said Wallace, "I think that I first have a story to tell on
my own account.

"At the time the jam broke this spring, we owed the men here for a
year's work.  At that time I considered their demand for wages
ill-timed and grasping.  I wish to apologize.  After the money was
paid them, instead of scattering, they set to work under Jack
Radway and Tim Shearer to salvage your logs.  They have worked long
hours all summer.  They have invested every cent of their year's
earnings in supplies and tools, and now they are prepared to show
you in the Company's booms, three million feet of logs, rescued by
their grit and hard labor from total loss."

At this point the speaker was interrupted.  "Saw off," "Shut up,"
"Give us a rest," growled the audience.  "Three million feet ain't
worth talkin' about," "You make me tired," "Say your little say
the way you oughter," "Found purty nigh two millions pocketed
on Mare's Island, or we wouldn't a had that much," "Damn-fool
undertaking, anyhow."

"Men," cried Thorpe, "I have been very fortunate.  From failure
success has come.  But never have I been more fortunate than in my
friends.  The firm is now on its feet.  It could afford to lose
three times the logs it lost this year---"

He paused and scanned their faces.

"But," he continued suddenly, "it cannot now, nor ever can afford
to lose what those three million feet represent,--the friends it
has made.  I can pay you back the money you have spent and the time
you have put in---"  Again he looked them over, and then for the
first time since they have known him his face lighted up with a
rare and tender smile of affection.  "But, comrades, I shall not
offer to do it: the gift is accepted in the spirit with which it
was offered---"

He got no further.  The air was rent with sound.  Even the members of
his own party cheered.  From every direction the crowd surged inward.
The women and Morton were forced up the platform to Thorpe.  The
latter motioned for silence.

"Now, boys, we have done it," said he, "and so will go back to work.
From now on you are my comrades in the fight."

His eyes were dim; his breast heaved; his voice shook.  Hilda was
weeping from excitement.  Through the tears she saw them all looking
at their leader, and in the worn, hard faces glowed the affection
and admiration of a dog for its master.  Something there was
especially touching in this, for strong men rarely show it.
She felt a great wave of excitement sweep over her.  Instantly
she was standing by Thorpe, her eyes streaming, her breast
trobbing with emotion.

"Oh!" she cried, stretching her arms out to them passionately, "Oh!
I love you; I love you all!"










                       BULFINCH'S MYTHOLOGY
                         THE AGE OF FABLE


                    Revised by Rev.E. E. Hale




CONTENTS

Chapter I
Origin of Greeks and Romans.   The Aryan Family.   The Divinities
of these Nations.   Character of the Romans.   Greek notion of
the World.   Dawn, Sun, and Moon.   Jupiter and the gods of
Olympus.   Foreign gods.    Latin Names.-- Saturn or Kronos.
Titans.   Juno, Vulcan, Mars, Phoebus-Apollo, Venus, Cupid,
Minerva, Mercury, Ceres, Bacchus.   The Muses.   The Graces.
The Fates.   The Furies.   Pan.    The Satyrs.   Momus.   Plutus.
  Roman gods.

Chapter II
Roman Idea of Creation.   Golden Age.   Milky Way.   Parnassus.
The Deluge.   Deucalion and Pyrrha.   Pandora.   Prometheus.
Apollo and Daphne.   Pyramus and Thisbe.   Davy's Safety Lamp.
Cephalus and Procris

Chapter III
Juno.   Syrinx, or Pandean Pipes.   Argus's Eyes.   Io.
Callisto   Constellations of Great and Little Bear.   Pole-star.
  Diana.   Actaeon.   Latona.   Rustics turned to Frogs.   Isle
of Delos.   Phaeton.   Palace of the Sun.   Phoebus.   Day.
Month.   Year.   Hours.   Seasons.   Chariot of the sun.   People
of Aethiopia.   Libyan Desert.   The Wells Dry.   The Sea
Shrinks.   Phaeton's Tomb.   The Heliades

Chapter IV
Silenus.   Midas.   Bacchus's Reward to Midas.   River Pactolus.
  Pan Challenges Apollo.   Midas's Ears.   Gordian Knot.   Baucis
and Philemon.   Aetna.   Perpetual Spring.   Pluto carries off
Prosperine.   Cere's Search.   Prosperine's Release.   Eleusinian
Mysteries.   Glaucis changed to a Fish.   Scylla

Chapter V
Pygmalion's Statue.   Dryope and Iole.   Lotus Tree.   Venus and
Adonis.  Anemone or Wind Flower.   Apollo and Hyacinthus.   Game
of Quoits.   Flower Hyacinthus.   Ceyx and Halcyone.   Palace of
the King of Sleep.   Morpheus.   Halcyon Birds.

Chapter VI
Hamadryads.   Pomona.   Vertumnus.   Iphis.   Cupid and Psyche.
Zephyr.   Temple of Ceres.   Temple of Venus.   The Ant.   Golden
Fleece.   Pluto.   Cerberus.   Charon.   The Treasure.   Stygian
Sleep.   Cup of Ambrosia.   Birth of Pleasure.   Greek name of
Psyche.

Chapter VII
Cadmus.   Origin of City of Thebes.   Tyrians.   Serpent.
Dragon's Teeth.   Harmonia.   Serpent Sacred to Mars.  Myrmidons.
  Cephalus.   Aeacus.   Pestilence Sent by June.   Origin of
Myrmidons.

Chapter VIII
Minos, King of Crete.   Nisus, his purple hair.   Scylla's
Betrayal.   Her Punishment.   Echo.   Juno's Sentence.
Narcissus.   Love for his own image.   Clytie.   Hopeless Love
for Apollo.   Becomes a Flower.   Hero and Leander.   Hellespont

Chapter IX
Goddess of Wisdom.   Arachne.   Her Challenge with Minerva.
Minerva's Web.   Arachne's Web.   Transformation.   Niobe Queen
of Thebes.   Mount Cynthus.  Death of Niobe's Children.   Changed
to stone.   The Gray-haired Sisters.   The Gorgon Medusa.   Tower
of brass.   Danae.   Perseus.   Net of Dicte.   Minerva.   King
Atlas.   Andromeda.   Sea Monster.   Wedding Feast.   Enemies
Turned to Stone.

Chapter X
Attributes of Monsters.   Laius.   Oedipus.   The Oracle.
Sphinx.   The Riddle.   Oedipus made King.   Jocasta.   Origin of
Pegasus.   Fountain of Hippocrene.   The Chimaera.
Bellerophontic Letters.   The Centaurs.   The Pygmies.
Description of the Griffin.   The Native Country.   One-Eyed
People

Chapter XI
The Ram with the Golden Fleece.   The Hellespont.   Jason's
Quest.   Sowing the Dragon's Teeth.   Jason's Father.
Incantations of Medea.   Ancient Name of Greece.   Great
Gatherings of the Greeks.   Wild Boar.   Atalanta's Race.   Three
Golden Apples.   Lovers' Ingratitude.   Venus's Revenge.
Corybantes

Chapter XII
Labors of Hercules.-- Fight with Nemean Lion.-- Slaughter of the
Hydra.  Cleaning the Augean Stables.-- Girdle of the Queen of the
Amazons.-- Oxen of Geryon.-- Golden Apples of Hesperides.--
Victory over Antaeus.-- Cacus Slain.-- Hercules, Descent into
Hades.-- He Becomes the Slave of Omphale.-- Dejanira's Charm.--
Death of Hercules.-- Hebe, Goddess of Youth

Chapter XIII
Theseus Moves the Fated Stone, and Proceeds to Athens.--
Procrustes's Bedstead.-- Tribute to Minos.-- Ariadne.-- Clew of
Thread.-- Encounter with the Minotaur.-- Theseus Becomes King of
Athens.-- Friendship of Theseus and Pirithous.  The Theseum.--
Festival of Panathenaea.-- Elgin Marbles.-- National Greek
Games.-- The Labyrinth.-- Daedalus' Wings.-- Invention of the
Saw.-- Castor and Pollux.-- Argonautic Expedition.-- Orpheus's
Harp.-- Gemini

Chapter XIV
Destruction of Semele.-- Infancy of Bacchus.-- March of Bacchus.-
- One of the Bacchanals taken Prisoner.-- Pentheus.-- Worship of
Bacchus Established in Greece.-- Ariadne.-- Bacchus's Marriage.--
Ariadne's Crown

Chapter XV
Pan.-- Shepherd's Pipe.-- Panic Terror.-- Signification of the
Name Pan.-- Latin Divinities.-- Wood Nymphs.-- Water Nymphs.--
Sea Nymphs.  Pleasing Traits of Old Paganism.-- Mrs. Browning's
Poem.-- Violation of Cere's Grove.-- Erisichthon's Punishment.--
Rhoecus.-- Water Deities.-- Neptune's Symbol of Power.-- Latin
Name for the Muses, and other Deities.-- Personification of the
Winds.   The Harpies.-- Worship of Fortuna

Chapter XVI
Transformation of Achelous.-- Origin of the Cornucopia.-- Ancient
Meaning of fight of Achelous with Hercules.-- Aesculapius.-- The
Cyclops.   Antigone.-- Expedition of the "Seven against Thebes."-
- Antigone's Sisterly Devotion.-- Antigone's Burial.-- Penelope.-
- Statue to Modesty.-- Ulysses.-- Penelope's suitors.--
Penelope's Web

Chapter XVII
Orpheus's Lyre.-- Unhappy Prognostics at Orpheus's Marriage.--
Eurydice's Death.-- Orpheus Descends to the Stygian Realm.--
Orpheus Loses Eurydice Forever.-- Thracian Maidens.-- Honey.--
Aristaeus's Loss and Complaint.-- Cyrene's Apartments.-- Proteus
Captured.-- His Directions to Orpheus.-- Swarm of Bees.--
Celebrated Mythical Poets and Musicians.-- First Mortal Endowed
with Prophetic Powers

Chapter XVIII
Adventures of Real Persons.-- Arion, Famous Musician.--
Description of Ancient Theatres.-- Murder of Ibycus.-- Chorus
Personating the Furies.-- Cranes of Ibycus.-- The Murderers
Seized.-- Simonides.-- Scopa's Jest.   Simonides's Escape.--
Sappho.-- "Lover's Leap"

Chapter XIX
Endymion.-- Mount Latmos. Gift of Perpetual Youth and Perpetual
Sleep.-- Orion.-- Kedalion.-- Orion's Girdle.-- The Fatal Shot
The Pleiads.-- Aurora.-- Memnon.-- statue of Memnon.-- Scylla.--
Acis and Galatea.-- River Acis

Chapter XX
Minerva's Competition.-- Paris's Decision.-- Helen.-- Paris's
Elopement.-- Ulysses's Pretence.-- The Apple of Discord.-- Priam,
King of Troy.-- Commander of Grecian Armament.-- Principal
Leaders of the Trojans.-- Agamemnon Kills the Sacred Stag.--
Iphigenia.-- The Trojan War.-- The Iliad.-- Interest of Dods and
Goddesses in the War.-- Achilles's Suit of Armor.-- Death of
Hector.-- Ransom Sent to Achilles.-- Achilles Grants Priam's
Request.-- Hector's Funeral Solemnities.

Chapter XXI
Achilles Captivated by Polyxena.-- Achilles' Claim.-- Bestowal of
Achilles' Armor.-- The Hyacinth.-- Arrows of Hercules.-- Death of
Paris.-- Celebrated Statue of Minerva.-- Wooden Horse.-- Greeks
Pretend to Abandon the Siege.-- Sea Serpents.-- Laocoon.-- Troy
subdued.-- Helen and Menelaus.-- Nepenthe.-- Agamemnon's
Misfortunes.-- Orestes.-- Electra.-- Site of the City of Troy

Chapter XXII
The Odyssey.-- The Wanderings of Ulysses.-- Country of the
Cyclops.-- The Island of Aeolus.-- The Barbarous Tribe of
Laestrygonians.-- Circe.-- The Sirens.-- Scylla and Charybdis.--
Cattle of Hyperion.-- Ulysses's Raft.-- Calypso Entertains
Ulysses.-- Telemachus and Mentor Escape from Calypso's Isle

Chapter XXIII
Ulysses Abandons the Raft.-- The Country of the Phaeacians.--
Nausicaa's Dream.-- A Game of Ball.-- Ulysses's Dilemma.--
Nausicaa's Courage.-- The Palace of Alcinous.-- Skill of the
Phaeacian Women.-- Hospitality to Ulysses.-- Demodocus, the Blind
Bard.-- Gifts to Ulysses

Chapter XXV
Virgil's Description of the Region of the Dead.-- Descend into
Hades.-- The Black River and Ferryman.-- Cape Palinurus.-- The
Three-Headed Dog.-- Regions of Sadness.-- Shades of Grecian and
Trojan Warriors.-- Judgment Hall of Rhadamanthus.-- The Elysian
Fields.-- Aeneas Meets His Father.-- Anchises Explains the Plan
of Creation.-- Transmigration of Souls.-- Egyptian Name of
Hades.-- Location of Elysium.-- Prophetic Power of the Sibyl.--
Legend of the Nine Books


Stories of Gods and Heroes.

Chapter I

Introduction

The literature of our time, as of all the centuries of
Christendom, is full of allusions to the gods and goddesses of
the Greeks and Romans.  Occasionally, and, in modern days, more
often, it contains allusions to the worship and the superstitions
of the northern nations of Europe.  The object of this book is to
teach readers who are not yet familiar with the writers of Greece
and Rome, or the ballads or legends of the Scandinavians, enough
of the stories which form what is called their mythology, to make
those allusions intelligible which one meets every day, even in
the authors of our own time.

The Greeks and Romans both belong to the same race or stock.  It
is generally known in our time as the Aryan family of mankind;
and so far as we know its history, the Greeks and Romans
descended from the tribes which emigrated from the high table-
lands of Northern India.  Other tribes emigrated in different
directions from the same centre, so that traces of the Aryan
language are found in the islands of the Pacific ocean.

The people of this race, who moved westward, seem to have had a
special fondness for open air nature, and a willingness to
personify the powers of nature.  They were glad to live in the
open air, and they specially encouraged the virtues which an
open-air people prize.  Thus no Roman was thought manly who could
not swim, and every Greek exercised in the athletic sports of the
palaestra.

The Romans and Grecian and German divisions of this great race
are those with which we have most to do in history and in
literature.  Our own English language is made up of the dialects
of different tribes, many of whom agreed in their use of words
which they had derived from our Aryan ancestry.  Thus our
substantive verb I AM appears in the original Sanscrit of the
Aryans as ESMI, and m for ME (MOI), or the first person singular,
is found in all the verbal inflections.  The Greek form of the
same verb was ESMI, which became ASMI,   and in Latin the first
and last vowels have disappeared, the verb is SUM.  Similar
relationships are traced in the numerals, and throughout all the
languages of these nations.

The Romans, like the Etruscans who came before them, were neither
poetical nor imaginative in temperament.  Their activity ran in
practical directions.  They therefore invented few, if any
stories, of the gods whom they worshipped with fixed rites.  Mr.
Macaulay speaks of these gods as "the sober abstractions of the
Roman pantheon."  We owe most of the stories of the ancient
mythology to the wit and fancy of the Greeks,   more playful and
imaginative,   who seized from Egypt and from the East such
legends as pleased them,   and adapted them in their own way.  It
often happens that such stories, resembling each other in their
foundation, are found in the Greek and Roman authors in several
different forms.

To understand these stories, we will here first acquaint
ourselves with the ideas of the structure of the universe, which
the poets and others held, and which will form the scenery, so to
speak, of the narratives.

The Greek poets believed the earth to be flat and circular, their
own country occupying the middle of it, the central point being
either Mount Olympus, the abode of the gods, or Delphi, so famous
for its oracle.

The circular disk of the earth was crossed from west to east, and
divided into two equal parts by the SEA, as they called the
Mediterranean, and its continuation the Euxine.

Around the earth flowed the RIVER OCEAN, its course being from
south to north on the western side of the earth, and in a
contrary direction on the eastern side.  It flowed in a steady,
equable current, unvexed by storm or tempest.  The sea, and all
the rivers on earth, received their waters from it.

The northern portion of the earth was supposed to be inhabited by
a happy race named the Hyperboreans [this word means "who live
beyond the north" from the word "hyper," beyond, and boreas, the
north wind], dwelling in everlasting bliss and spring beyond the
lofty mountains whose caverns were supposed to send forth the
piercing blasts of the north wind, which chilled the people of
Hellas (Greece).  Their country was inaccessible by land or sea.
They lived exempt from disease or old age, from toils and
warfare.  Moore has given us the "Song of a Hyperborean,"
beginning

"I come from a land in the sun-bright deep,
Where golden gardens glow,
Where the winds of the north, becalmed in sleep,
Their conch-shells never blow."

On the south side of the earth, close to the stream of Ocean,
dwelt a people happy and virtuous as the Hyperboreans.  They were
named the AEthiopians.  The gods favored them so highly that they
were wont to leave at times their Olympian abodes, and go to
share their sacrifices and banquets.

On the western margin of the earth, by the stream of Ocean, lay a
happy place named the Elysian Plain, whither mortals favored by
the gods were transported without tasting of death, to enjoy an
immortality of bliss.  This happy region was also called the
"fortunate fields," and the "Isles of the Blessed."

We thus see that the Greeks of the early ages knew little of any
real people except those to the east and south of their own
country, or near the coast of the Mediterranean.  Their
imagination meantime peopled the western portion of this sea with
giants, monsters, and enchantresses; while they placed around the
disk of the earth, which they probably regarded as of no great
width, nations enjoying the peculiar favor of the gods, and
blessed with happiness and longevity.

The Dawn, the Sun, and the Moon were supposed to rise out of the
Ocean, on the western side, and to drive through the air, giving
light to gods and men.  The stars also, except those forming
Charles' Wain or Bear, and others near them, rose out of and sank
into the stream of Ocean.  There the sun-god embarked in a winged
boat, which conveyed him round by the northern part of the earth,
back to his place of rising in the east.  Milton alludes to this
in his "Commmus."

"Now the gilded car of day
His golden axle doth allay
In the steep Atlantic stream,
And the slope sun his upward beam
Shoots against the dusky pole,
Pacing towards the other goal
Of his chamber in the east."

The abode of the gods was on the summit of Mount Olympus, in
Thessaly.  A gate of clouds, kept by the goddesses named the
Seasons, opened to permit the passage of the Celestials to earth,
and to receive them on their return.  The gods had their separate
dwellings; but all, when summoned, repaired to the palace of
Jupiter [Or Zeus.  The relation of these names to each other will
be explained on the next page], as did also those deities whose
usual abode was the earth, the waters, or the underworld.  It was
also in the great hall of the palace of the Olympian king that
the gods feasted each day on ambrosia and nectar, their food and
drink, the latter being handed round by the lovely goddess Hebe.
Here they conversed of the affairs of heaven and earth; and as
they quaffed their nectar, Apollo, the god of music, delighted
them with the tones of his lyre, to which the muses sang in
responsive strains.  When the sun was set, the gods retired to
sleep in their respective dwellings.

The following lines from the Odyssey will show how Homer
conceived of Olympus:--

"So saying, Minerva, goddess azure-eyed,
Rose to Olympus, the reputed seat
Eternal of the gods, which never storms
Disturb, rains drench, or snow invades, but calm
The expanse and cloudless shines with purest day.
There the inhabitants divine rejoice
Forever.:" Cowper

Such were the abodes of the gods as the Greeks conceived them.
The Romans, before they knew the Greek poetry, seem to have had
no definite imagination of such an assembly of gods.  But the
Roman and Etruscan races were by no means irreligious.  They
venerated their departed ancestors,   and in each family the
worship of these ancestors was an important duty.  The images of
the ancestors were kept in a sacred place,   each family
observed, at fixed times, memorial rites in their honor,   and
for these and other religious observances the family hearth was
consecrated.  The earliest rites of Roman worship are supposed to
be connected with such family devotions.

As the Greeks and Romans became acquainted with other nations,
they imported their habits of worship, even in early times.  It
will be remembered that as late as St. Paul's time, he found an
altar at Athens "to an unknown god."  Greeks and Romans alike
were willing to receive from other nations the legends regarding
their gods, and to incorporate them as well as they could with
their own.  It is thus that in the poetical mythology of those
nations, which we are now to study, we frequently find a Latin
and a Greek name for one imagined divinity.  Thus Zeus, of the
Greeks, becomes in Latin   with the addition of the word pater (a
father) [The reader will observe that father is one of the words
derived from an Ayan root.  Let p and t become rough, as the
grammarians say,   let p become ph, and t th, and you have
phather or father], Jupiter   Kronos of the Greeks appears as
"Vulcanus" of the Latins, "Ares" of the Greeks is "Mars" or
Mavors of the Latins, "Poseidon" of the Greeks is "Neptunus" of
the Latins, "Aphrodite" of the Greeks is "Venus" of the Latins.
This variation is not to be confounded with a mere translation,
as where "Paulos" of the Greek becomes "Paulus" in Latin, or
"Odysseus" becomes "Ulysses,"   or as when "Pierre" of the French
becomes "Peter" in English.  What really happened was, that as
the Romans, more cultivated than their fathers, found in Greek
literature a god of fire and smithery,   they transferred his
name "Hephaistos" to their own old god "Vulcanus,"   who had the
same duties,   and in their after literature the Latin name was
used for the stories of Greek and Latin origin.

As the English literature came into being largely on French and
Latin models, and as French is but a degraded Latin and retains
Latin roots largely,   in our older English poets the Latin forms
of these names are generally used.  In our own generation, with
the precision now so much courted, a fashion has come in, of
designating Mars by his Greek name of "Ares," Venus by her name
of "Aphrodite," and so on.  But in this book, as our object is to
make familiar the stores of general English literature which
refer to such subjects, we shall retain, in general, the Latin
names,   only calling the attention of the reader to the Greek
names, as they appear in Greek authors,   and in many writers of
the more recent English schools.

The real monarch of the heavens in the mythology of both Greece
and Rome is Jupiter (Zeus-pater, father-Jove) [Jove appears to be
a word derived from the same root as Zeus, and it appears in the
root dev of the Sanscrit, where devas are gods of different
forms.  Our English word devil probably comes from the French
diable, Italian diavolo, Latin diabolus, one who makes division,-
- literally one who separates balls, or throws balls about,--
instead of throwing them frankly and truly at the batsman.  It is
not to be traced to the Sanscrit deva.]

In the mythological system we are tracing Zeus is himself the
father of many of the gods, and he is often spoken of as father
of gods and men.  He is the father of Vulcan [In Greek
Hephaistos], of Venus [in Greek Aphrodite], of Minerva [in Greek
Pallas Athene, or either name separately], of Apollo [of
Phoebus], Diana [in Greek Artemis], and of Mercury [in Greek
Hermes], who are ranked among the twelve superior gods, and of
many inferior deities.  But Jupiter himself is not the original
deity in these systems.  He is the son of Saturnus, as in the
Greek Zeus is the son of Kronos.  Still the inevitable question
would occur where did Saturnus or Kronos come from.  And, in
forms and statements more and more vague, the answer was that he
was born from Uranus or Ouranos, which is the name of the Heaven
over all which seemed to embrace all things.  The Greek name of
Saturn was spelled Kronos.  The Greek name of Time was spelled
Chronos.  A similarity between the two was imagined.  And the
whole statement, when reduced to rationalistic language, would be
that from Uranus, the infinite, was born Chronos, Time,-- that
from Time, Zeus or Jupiter was born, and that he is the only
child of Time who has complete sway over mortals and immortals.

"The will of Jove I own,
Who mortals and immortals rules alone."
Homer, II.xii

Jupiter was son of Saturn (Kronos) [The names included in
parentheses are the Greek, the others being the Roman or Latin
names] and Ops (Rhea in Greek, sometimes confounded with the
Phrygian Cybele).

Saturn and Rhea were of the race of Titans, who were the children
of Earth and Heaven, which sprang from Chaos, of which we shall
give a further account in our next chapter.

In allusion to the dethronement of Ouranos by Kronos, and of
Kronos or Saturnus by Zeus or Jupiter, Prometheus says in
AEschylus's tragedy,--

"You may deem
Its towers impregnable; but have I not
already seen two monarchs hurled from them."

Thee is another cosmogony, or account of the creation, according
to which Earth, Erebus, and Love were the first of beings.  Love
(Eros)_ issued from the egg of Night, which floated on Chaos.  By
his arrows and torch he pierced and vivified all things,
producing life and joy.

Saturn and Rhea were not the only Titans.  There were others,
whose names were Oceanus, Hyperion, Iapetus, and Ophion, males;
and Themis, Mnemosyne, Eurynome, females.  They are spoken of as
the elder gods, whose dominion was afterwards transferred to
others.  Saturn yielded to Jupiter, Oceanus to Neptune, Hyperion
to Apollo.  Hyperion was the father of the Sun, Moon, and Dawn.
He is therefore the original sun-god, and is painted with the
splendor and beauty which were afterwards bestowed on Apollo.

"Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself."   Shakespeare

Ophion and Eurynome ruled over Olympus till they were dethroned
by Saturn and Rhea.  Milton alludes to them in Paradise Lost.  He
says the heathen seem to have had some knowledge of the
temptation and fall of man,--

"And fabled how the serpent, whom they called
Ophion, with Eurynome (the wide-
Encroaching Eve perhaps), had first the rule
Of high Olympus, thence by Saturn driven."

The representations given of Saturn are not very consistent, for
on the one hand his reign is said to have been the golden age of
innocence and purity, and on the other he is described as a
monster who devoured his own children [This inconsistency arises
from considering the Saturn of the Romans the same with the
Grecian deity Chronos (Time), which, as it brings an end to all
things which have had a beginning, may be said to devour its own
offspring.] Jupiter, however, escaped this fate, and when grown
up espoused Metis (Prudence), who administered a draught to
Saturn which caused him to disgorge his children.  Jupiter, with
his brothers and sisters, now rebelled against their father
Saturn, and his brothers the Titans; vanquished them, and
imprisoned some of them in Tartarus, inflicting other penalties
on others.  Atlas was condemned to bear up the heavens on his
shoulders.

On the dethronement of Saturn, Jupiter with his brothers Neptune
(Poseidon) and Pluto (Dis) divided his dominions.  Jupiter's
portion was the heavens, Neptune's the ocean, and Pluto's the
realms of the dead.  Earth and Olympus were common property.
Jupiter was king of gods and men.  The thunder was his weapon,
and he bore a shield called AEgis, made for him by Vulcan.  The
eagle was his favorite bird, and bore his thunderbolts.

Juno (Hera)[pronounce He-re, in two syllables] was the wife of
Jupiter, and queen of the gods.  Iris, the goddess of the
rainbow, was her attendant and messenger.  The peacock was her
favorite bird.

Vulcan (Hephaistos), the celestial artist, was the son of Jupiter
and Juno.  He was born lame, and his mother was so displeased at
the sight of him that she flung him out of heaven.  Other
accounts say that Jupiter kicked him out for taking part with his
mother, in a quarrel which occurred between them.  Vulcan's
lameness, according to this account, was the consequence of his
fall.  He was a whole day falling, and at last alighted in the
island of Lemnos, which was thenceforth sacred to him.  Milton
alludes to this story in Paradise lost, Book I.

"From morn
To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,
A summer's day; and with the setting sun
Dropped from the zenith, like a falling star,
On Lemnos, the AEgean isle."

Mars (Ares), the god of war, was the son of Jupiter and Juno.
Phoebus Apollo [this is a Greek name of a Greek divinity, who
seems to have had no Roman resemblance], the god of archery,
prophecy, and music, was the son of Jupiter and Latona, and
brother of Diana (Artemis).  He was god of the sun, as Diana, his
sister, was the goddess of the moon.

Venus (Aphrodite), the goddess of love and beauty, was the
daughter of Jupiter and Dione.  Others say that Venus sprang from
the foam of the sea.  The zephyr wafted her along the waves to
the Isle of Cyprus, where she was received and attired by the
Seasons, and then led to the assembly of the gods.  All were
charmed with her beauty, and each one demanded her for his wife.
Jupiter gave her to Vulcan, in gratitude for the service he had
rendered in forging thunderbolts.  So the most beautiful of the
goddesses became the wife of the most ill-favored of the gods.
Venus possessed an embroidered girdle called the Cestus, which
had the power of inspiring love.  Her favorite birds were swans
and doves, and the plants sacred to her were the rose and the
myrtle.

Cupid (Eros), the god of love, was the son of Venus.  He was her
constant companion; and, armed with bow and arrows, he shot the
darts of desire into the bosoms of both gods and men.  There was
a deity named Anteros, who was sometimes represented as the
avenger of slighted love, and sometimes as the symbol of
reciprocal affection.  The following legend is told of him:--

Venus, complaining to Themis that her son Eros continued always a
child, was told by her that it was because he was solitary, and
that if he had a brother he would grow apace.  Anteros was soon
afterwards born, and Eros immediately was seen to increase
rapidly in size and strength.

Minerva (Pallas Athene), the goddess of wisdom, was the offspring
of Jupiter, without a mother.  She sprang from his head,
completely armed.  Her favorite bird was the owl, and the plant
sacred to her the olive.

Byron, in "Childe Harold," alludes to the birth of Minerva thus:-
-

"Can tyrants but by tyrants conquered be,
And freedom find no champion and no child,
Such as Columbia saw arise, when she
Sprang forth a Pallas, armed and undefiled?
Or must such minds be nourished in the wild,
Deep in the unpruned forest, 'midst the roar
Of Cataracts, where nursing Nature smiled
On infant Washington?  Has earth no more
Such seeds within her breast, or Europe no such shore?"

Mercury (Hermes), was the son of Jupiter and Maia.  He presided
over commerce, wrestling and other gymnastic exercises; even over
thieving, and everything, in short, which required skill and
dexterity.  He was the messenger of Jupiter, and wore a winged
cap and winged shoes.  He bore in his hand a rod entwined with
two serpents, called the Caduceus.

Mercury is said to have invented the lyre.  Four hours after his
birth he found the shell of a tortoise, made holes in the
opposite edges of it, and drew cords of linen through them, and
the instrument was complete [From this origin of the instrument,
the word "shell" is often used as synonymous with :"lyre," and
figuratively for music and poetry.  Thus Gray, in his ode on the
"Progress of Poesy," says,-- "O Sovereign of the willing soul,
Parent of sweet and solemn-breathing airs, Enchanting shell! The
sullen Cares And Frantic Passions hear thy soft control."] The
cords were nine, in honor of the nine Muses.  Mercury gave the
lyre to Apollo, and received from him in exchange the caduceus.

Ceres (Demeter) was the daughter of Saturn and Rhea.  She had a
daughter named Proserpine (Persephone), who became the wife of
Pluto, and queen of the realms of the dead.  Ceres presided over
agriculture.

Bacchus (Dionysus)_, the god of wine, was the son of Jupiter and
Semele.  He represents not only the intoxicating power of wine,
but its social and beneficent influences likewise; so that he is
viewed as the promoter of civilization, and a lawgiver and lover
of peace.

The muses were the daughters of Jupiter and Mnemosyne (Memory).
They presided over song, and prompted the memory.  They were nine
in number, to each of whom was assigned the presidency over some
particular department of literature, art, or science.  Calliope
was the muse of epic poetry, Clio of history, Euterpe of lyric
poetry, Melpomene of tragedy, Terpischore of choral dance and
song, Erato of love-poetry, Polyhymnia of sacred poetry, Urania
of astronomy, Thalia [Pronounced Tha-lei-a, with the emphasis on
the second syllable] of comedy.

Spenser described the office of the Graces thus:--

"These three on men all gracious gifts bestow
Which deck the body or adorn the mind,
To make them lovely or well-favored show;
As comely carriage, entertainment kind,
Sweet semblance, friendly offices that bind,
And all the compliments of courtesy;
They teach us how to each degree and kind
We should ourselves demean, to low, to high.
To friends, to foes; which skill men call Civility."

The Fates were also three   Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos.  Their
office was to spin the thread of human destiny, and they were
armed with shears, with which they cut it off when they pleased.
They were the daughters of Themis (Law), who sits by Jove on his
throne to give him counsel.

The Erinnyes, or Furies, were three goddesses who punished crimes
by their secret stings.  The heads of the Furies were wreathed
with serpents, and their whole appearance was terrific and
appalling.  Their names were Alecto, Tisiphone, and Megaera.
They were also called Eumenides.

Nemesis was also an avenging goddess.  She represents the
righteous anger of the gods, particularly towards the proud and
insolent.

Pan [the name Pan means everything, and he is sometimes spoken of
as the god of all nature] was the god of flocks and shepherds.
His favorite residence, as the Greeks describe him, was in
Arcadia.

The Satyrs were deities of the woods and fields.  They were
conceived to be covered with bristly hair, their heads decorated
with short, sprouting horns, and their feet like goats' feet.

Momus was the god of laughter, and Plutus the god of wealth.

ROMAN DIVINITIES

The preceding are Grecian divinities, though received also by the
Romans.  Those which follow are peculiar to Roman mythology.

Saturn was an ancient Italian deity.  The Roman poets tried to
identify him with the Grecian god Kronos, and fabled that after
his dethronement by Jupiter, he fled to Italy, where he reigned
during what was called the Golden Age.  In memory of his
beneficent dominion, the feast of Saturnalia was held every year
in the winter season.  Then all public business was suspended,
declarations of war and criminal executions were postponed,
friends made presents to one another, and the slaves were
indulged with great liberties.  A feast was given them at which
they sat at table, while their masters served them, to show the
natural equality of men, and that all things belonged equally to
all, in the reign of Saturn.

Faunus [there was also a goddess called Fauna, or Bona Dea], the
grandson of Saturn, was worshipped as the god of fields and
shepherds, and also as a prophetic god.  His name in the plural,
Fauns, expressed a class of gamesome deities, like the Satyrs of
the Greeks.

Quirinus was a war god, said to be no other than Romulus the
founder of Rome, exalted after his death to a place among the
gods.

Bellona, a war goddess.

Terminus, the god of landmarks.  His statue was a rude stone or
post, set in the ground to mark the boundaries of fields.

Pales, the goddess presiding over cattle and pastures.

Pomona presided over fruit trees.

Flora, the goddess of flowers.

Lucina, the goddess of childbirth.

Vesta (the Hestia of the Greeks) was a deity presiding over the
public and private hearth.  A sacred fire, tended by six virgin
priestesses called Vestals, flamed in her temple.  As the safety
of the city was held to be connected with its conservation, the
neglect of the virgins, if they let it go out, was severely
punished, and the fire was rekindled from the rays of the sun.

Liber is another Latin name of Bacchus; and Mulciber of Vulcan.

Janus was the porter of heaven.  He opens the year, the first
month being named after him.  He is the guardian deity of gates,
on which account he is commonly represented with two heads,
because every door looks two ways.  His temples at Rome were
numerous.  In war time the gates of the principal one were always
open.  In peace they were closed; but they were shut only once
between the reign of Numa and that of Augustus.

The Penates were the gods who were supposed to attend to the
welfare and prosperity of the family.  Their name is derived from
Penus, the pantry, which was sacred to them.  Every master of a
family was the priest to the Penates of his own house.

The Lares, or Lars, were also household gods, but differed from
the Penates in being regarded as the deified spirits of mortals.
The family Lars were held to be the souls of the ancestors, who
watched over and protected their descendants.  The words Lemur
and Larva more nearly correspond to our word Ghost.

The Romans believed that every man had his Genius, and every
woman her Juno; that is, a spirit who had given them being, and
was regarded as a protector through life.  On birthdays men made
offerings to their Genius, women to their Juno.

Macaulay thus alludes to some of the Roman gods:--

"Pomona loves the orchard,
And Liber loves the vine,
And Pales loves the straw-built shed
Warm with the breath of kine;
And Venus loves the whisper
Of plighted youth and maid
In April's ivory moonlight,
Beneath the Chestnut shade."
"Prophecy of Capys."

N.B.  It is to be observed that in proper names the final e and
es are to be sounded.  Thus Cybele and Penates are words of three
syllables.   But Proserpine and Thebes have been so long used as
English words, that they may be regarded as exceptions, to be
pronounced as if English.  Hecate is sometimes pronounced by the
poets as a dissylable.  In the Index at the close of the volume,
we shall mark the accented syllable, in all words which appear to
require it.


CHAPTER II
Prometheus and Pandora

The Roman poet Ovid gives us a connected narrative of creation.
Before the earth and sea and the all-covering heaven, one aspect,
which we call Chaos, covered all the face of Nature,-- a rough
heap of inert weight and discordant beginnings of things clashing
together.  As yet no sun gave light to the world, nor did the
moon renew her slender horn month by month,-- neither did the
earth hang in the surrounding air, poised by its own weight,--
nor did the sea stretch its long arms around the earth.  Wherever
there was earth, there was also sea and air.  So the earth was
not solid nor was the water fluid, neither was the air
transparent.

God and Nature at last interposed and put an end to this discord,
separating earth from sea, and heaven from both.  The fiery part,
being the lightest, sprang up, and formed the skies; the air was
next in weight and place.  The earth, being heavier, sank below,
and the water took the lowest place and buoyed up the earth.

Here some god, no man knows who, arranged and divided the land.
He placed the rivers and bays, raised mountains and dug out
valleys and distributed woods, fountains, fertile fields and
stony plains.  Now that the air was clear the stars shone out,
the fishes swam the sea and birds flew in the air, while the
four-footed beasts roamed around the earth.  But a nobler animal
was needed, and man was made in the image of the gods with an
upright stature [The two Greek words for man have the root an,
"up], so that while all other animals turn their faces downward
and look to the earth, he raises his face to heaven and gazes on
the stars [Every reader will be interested in comparing this
narrative with that in the beginning of Genesis.  It seems clear
that so many Jews were in Rome in Ovid's days, many of whom were
people of consideration among those with whom he lived, that he
may have heard the account in the Hebrew Scriptures translated.
Compare JUDAISM by Prof. Frederic Huidekoper.]

To Prometheus the Titan and to his brother Epimetheus was
committed the task of making man and all other animals, and of
endowing them with all needful faculties.  This Epimetheus did,
and his brother overlooked the work.  Epimetheus then gave to the
different animals their several gifts of courage, strength,
swiftness and sagacity.  He gave wings to one, claws to another,
a shelly covering to the third.  Man, superior to all other
animals, came last.  But for man Epimetheus had nothing,-- he had
bestowed all his gifts elsewhere.  He came to his brother for
help, and Prometheus, with the aid of Minerva, went up to heaven,
lighted his torch at the chariot of the sun, and brought down
fire to man.  With this, man was more than equal to all other
animals.  Fire enabled him to make weapons to subdue wild beasts,
tools with which to till the earth.  With fire he warmed his
dwelling and bid defiance to the cold.

Woman was not yet made.  The story is, that Jupiter made her, and
sent her to Prometheus and his brother, to punish them for their
presumption in stealing fire from heaven; and man, for accepting
the gift.  The first woman was named Pandora.  She was made in
heaven, every god contributing something to perfect her.  Venus
gave her beauty, Mercury persuasion, Apollo music.  Thus
equipped, she was conveyed to earth, and presented to Epimetheus,
who gladly accepted her, though cautioned by his brother to
beware of Jupiter and his gifts.  Epimetheus had in his house a
jar, in which were kept certain noxious articles, for which, in
fitting man for his new abode, he had had no occasion.  Pandora
was seized with an eager curiosity to know what this jar
contained; and one day she slipped off the cover and looked in.
Forthwith there escaped a multitude of plagues for hapless man,--
such as gout, rheumatism, and colic for his body, and envy,
spite, and revenge for his mind,-- and scattered themselves far
and wide.  Pandora hastened to replace the lid; but, alas! The
whole contents of the jar had escaped, one thing only excepted,
which lay at the bottom, and that was HOPE.  So we see at this
day, whatever evils are abroad, hope never entirely leaves us;
and while we have THAT, no amount of other ills can make us
completely wretched.

Another story is, that Pandora was sent in good faith, by
Jupiter, to bless man; that she was furnished with a box,
containing her marriage presents, into which every god had put
some blessing.  She opened the box incautiously, and the
blessings all escaped, HOPE only excepted.  This story seems more
consistent than the former; for how could HOPE, so precious a
jewel as it is, have been kept in a jar full of all manner of
evils?

The world being thus furnished with inhabitants, the first age
was an age of innocence and happiness, called the GOLDEN AGE.
Truth and right prevailed, though not enforced by law, nor was
there any magistrate to threaten or punish.  The forest had not
yet been robbed of its trees to furnish timbers for vessels, nor
had men built fortifications round their towns.  There were no
such things as swords, spears, or helmets.  The earth brought
forth all things necessary for man, without his labor in
ploughing or sowing.  Perpetual spring reigned, flowers sprang up
without seed, the rivers flowed with milk and wine, and yellow
honey distilled from the oaks.

"But when good Saturn, banished from above,
Was driven to hell, the world was under Jove.
Succeeding times a Silver Age behold,
Excelling brass, but more excelled by gold.
Then summer, autumn, winter did appear,
And spring was but a season of the year.
The sun his annual course obliquely made,
Good days contracted and enlarged the bad,
Then air, with sultry heats, began to glow;
The wings of winds were clogged with ice and sno
And shivering mortals into houses driven,
Sought shelter from the inclemency of heaven.
Those houses then were caves, or homely sheds;
With twining osiers fenced; and moss their beds.
Then ploughs, for seed, the fruitful furrows broke,
And oxen labored first beneath the yoke.
To this came next in course the Brazen Age:
A warlike offspring, prompt to bloody rage,
Not impious yet! . .
. . . Hard Steel succeeded then;
And stubborn as the metal were the men."
Ovid's Metam, Book I.  Dryden's Translation.

Crime burst in like a flood; modesty, truth, and honor fled.  In
their places came fraud and cunning, violence, and the wicked
love of gain.  Then seamen spread sails to the wind, and the
trees were torn from the mountains to serve for keels to ships,
and vex the face of ocean.  The earth, which till now had been
cultivated in common, began to be divided off into possessions.
Men were not satisfied with what the surface produced, but must
dig into its bowels, and draw forth from thence the ores of
metals.  Mischievous IRON, and more mischievous GOLD, were
produced.  War sprang up, using both as weapons; the guest was
not safe in his friend's house; and sons-in-law and fathers-in-
law, brothers and sisters, husbands and wives, could not trust
one another.  Sons wished their fathers dead, that they might
come to the inheritance; family love lay prostrate.  The earth
was wet with slaughter, and the gods abandoned it, one by one,
till Astraea [the goddess of innocence and purity.  After leaving
earth, she was placed among the stars, where she became the
constellation Virgo  The Virgin.  Themis (Justice) was the mother
of Astraea.  She is represented as holding aloft a pair of
scales, in which she weighs the claims of opposing parties.  It
was a favorite idea of the old poets, that these goddesses would
one day return, and bring back the Golden Age.  Even in a
Christian Hymn, the Messiah of Pope, this idea occurs.

"All crimes shall cease, and ancient fraud shall fail,
Returning Justice lift aloft her scale,
Peace o'er the world her olive wand extend,
And white-robed Innocence from heaven descend."  See, also,
Milton's Hymn on the nativity, stanzas xiv, and xv] alone was
left, and finally she also took her departure.

Jupiter, seeing this state of things, burned with anger.  He
summoned the gods to council.  They obeyed the call, and took
The road to the palace of heaven.  The road, which any one may
see in a clear night, stretches across the face of the sky, and
is called the Milky Way.  Along the road stand the palaces of the
illustrious gods; the common people of the skies live apart, on
either side.  Jupiter addressed the assembly.  He set forth the
frightful condition of things on the earth, and closed by
announcing his intention to destroy the whole of its inhabitants,
and provide a new race, unlike the first, who would be more
worthy of life, and much better worshippers of   the gods.  So
saying he took a thunderbolt, and was about to launch it at the
world, and destroy it by burning it; but recollecting the danger
that such a conflagration might set heaven itself on fire, he
changed his plan, and resolved to drown the world.  Aquilo, the
north wind, which scatters the clouds, was chained up; Notus, the
south, was sent out, and soon covered all the face of heaven with
a cloak of pitchy darkness.  The clouds, driven together, resound
with a crash; torrents of rain fall; the crops are laid low; the
year's labor of the husbandman perishes in an hour.  Jupiter, not
satisfied with his own waters, calls on his brother Neptune to
aid him with his.  He lets loose the rivers, and pours them over
the land.  At the same time, he heaves the land with an
earthquake, and brings in the reflux of the ocean over the
shores.  Flocks, herds, men, and houses are swept away, and
temples, with their sacred enclosures, profaned.  If any edifice
remained standing, it was overwhelmed, and its turrets lay hid
beneath the waves.  Now all was sea; sea without shore.  Here and
there some one remained on a projecting hill-top, and a few, in
boats, pulled the oar where they had lately driven the plough.
The fishes swim among the tree-tops; the anchor is let down into
a garden.  Where the graceful lambs played but now, unwieldy sea-
calves gambol.  The wolf swims among the sheep; the yellow lions
and tigers struggle in the water.  The strength of the wild boar
serves him not, nor his swiftness the stag.  The birds fall with
weary wing into the water, having found no land for a resting
place.  Those living beings whom the water spared fell a prey to
hunger.

Parnassus alone, of all the mountains, overtopped the waves; and
there Deucalion and his wife Pyrrha, of the race of Prometheus,
found refuge   he a just man, and she a faithful worshipper of
the gods.  Jupiter, when he saw none left alive but this pair,
and remembered their harmless lives and pious demeanor, ordered
the north winds to drive away the clouds, and disclose the skies
to earth, and earth to the skies.  Neptune also directed Triton
to blow on his shell, and sound a retreat to the waters.  The
waters obeyed, and the sea returned to its shores, and the rivers
to their channels.  Then Deucalion thus addressed Pyrrha: "O
wife, only surviving woman, joined to me first by the ties of
kindred and marriage, and now by a common danger, would that we
possessed the power of our ancestor Prometheus, and could renew
the race as he at first made it!  But as we cannot, let us seek
yonder temple, and inquire of the gods what remains for us to
do."  They entered the temple, deformed as it was with slime, and
approached the altar, where no fire burned.  There they fell
prostrate on the earth, and prayed the goddess to inform them how
they might retrieve their miserable affairs.  The oracle
answered, "Depart from the temple with head veiled and garments
unbound, and cast behind you the bones of your mother."  They
heard the words with astonishment.  Pyrrha first broke silence:
"We cannot obey; we dare not profane the remains of our parents."
They sought the thickest shades of the wood, and revolved the
oracle in their minds.  At length Deucalion spoke: "Either my
sagacity deceives me, or the command is one we may obey without
impiety.  The earth is the great parent of all; the stones are
her bones; these we may cast behind us; and I think this is what
the oracle means.  At least, it will do no harm to try."  They
veiled their faces, unbound their garments, and picked up stones,
and cast them behind them.  The stones (wonderful to relate)
began to grow soft, and assume shape.  By degrees, they put on a
rude resemblance to the human form, like a block half finished in
the hands of the sculptor.  The moisture and slime that were
about them became flesh; the stony part became bones; the veins
remained veins, retaining their name, only changing their use.
Those thrown by the hand of the man became men, and those by the
woman became women.  It was a hard race, and well adapted to
labor, as we find ourselves to be at this day, giving plain
indications of our origin.

The comparison of Eve to Pandora is too obvious to have escaped
Milton, who introduces it in Book IV, of Paradise Lost:--

"More lovely than Pandora, whom the gods
Endowed with all their gifts; and O, too like
In sad event, when to the unwiser son
Of Jupiter, brought by Hermes, she ensnared
Mankind with her fair looks, to be avenged
On him who had stole Jove's authentic fire."

Prometheus and Epimetheus were sons of Iapetus, which Milton
changes to Japhet.

Prometheus, the Titan son of Iapetus and Themis, is a favorite
subject with the poets.  AEschylus wrote three tragedies on the
subjects of his confinement, his release, and his worship at
Athens.  Of these only the first is preserved, the Prometheus
Bound.  Prometheus was the only one in the council of the gods
who favored man.  He alone was kind to the human race, and taught
and protected them.

"I formed his mind,
And through the cloud of barbarous ignorance
Diffused the beams of knowledge . . . .
They saw indeed, they heard, but what availed
Or sight or hearing, all things round them rolling,
Like the unreal imagery of dreams
In wild confusion mixed!  The lightsome wall
Of finer masonry, the raftered roof
They knew not; but like ants still buried, delved
Deep in the earth and scooped their sunless caves.
Unmarked the seasons ranged, the biting winter,
The flower-perfumed spring, the ripening summer
Fertile of fruits.  At random all their works
Till I instructed them to mark the stars,
Their rising, and, a harder science yet,
Their setting.  The rich train of marshalled numbers
I taught them, and the meet array of letters.
To impress these precepts on their hearts I sent
Memory, the active mother of all reason.
I taught the patient steer to bear the yoke,
In all his toils joint-laborer of man.
By me the harnessed steed was trained to whirl
The rapid car, and grace the pride of wealth.
The tall bark, lightly bounding o'er the waves,
I taught its course, and winged its flying sail.
To man I gave these arts."
Potter's Translation from the Prometheus Bound

Jupiter, angry at the insolence and presumption of Prometheus in
taking upon himself to give all these blessings to man, condemned
the Titan to perpetual imprisonment, bound on a rock on Mount
Caucasus while a vulture should forever prey upon his liver.
This state of torment might at any time have been brought to an
end by Prometheus if he had been willing to submit to his
oppressor.  For Prometheus knew of a fatal marriage which Jove
must make and by which he must come to ruin.  Had Prometheus
revealed this secret he would at once have been taken into favor.
But this he disdained to do.  He has therefore become the symbol
of magnanimous endurance of unmerited suffering and strength of
will resisting oppression.

Byron and Shelley have both treated this theme.  The following
are Byron's lines:--

"Titan!  To whose immortal eyes
The sufferings of mortality,
Seen in their sad reality,
Were not as things that gods despise,
What was thy pity's recompense?
A silent suffering, and intense;
The rock, the vulture, and the chain;
All that the proud can feel of pain;
The agony they do not show;
The suffocating sense of woe.

"Thy godlike crime was to be kind;
To render with thy precepts less
The sum of human wretchedness,
And strengthen man with his own mind.
And, baffled as thou wert from high,
Still, in thy patient energy,
In the endurance and repulse,
Of thine impenetrable spirit,
Which earth and heaven could not convulse,
A mighty lesson we inherit."



PYTHON

The slime with which the earth was covered by the waters of the
flood, produced an excessive fertility, which called forth every
variety of production, both bad and good.  Among the rest,
Python, an enormous serpent, crept forth, the terror of the
people, and lurked in the caves of Mount Parnassus.  Apollo slew
him with his arrows   weapons which he had not before used
against any but feeble animals, hares, wild goats, and such game.
In commemoration of this illustrious conquest he instituted the
Pythian games, in which the victor in feats of strength,
swiftness of foot, or in the chariot race, was crowned with a
wreath of beech leaves; for the laurel was not yet adopted by
Apollo as his own tree.  And here Apollo founded his oracle at
Delphi, the only oracle "that was not exclusively national, for
it was consulted by many outside nations, and, in fact, was held
in the highest repute all over the world.  In obedience to its
decrees, the laws of Lycurgus were introduced, and the earliest
Greek colonies founded.  No cities were built without first
consulting the Delphic oracle, for it was believed that Apollo
took special delight in the founding of cities, the first stone
of which he laid in person; nor was any enterprise ever
undertaken without inquiry at this sacred fane as to its probable
success" [From Beren's Myths and Legends of Greece and Rome.]

The famous statue of Apollo called the Belvedere [From the
Belvedere of the Vatican palace where it stands] represents the
god after his victory over the serpent Python.  To this Byron
alludes in his Childe Harold, iv. 161:--

"The lord of the unerring bow,
The god of life, and poetry, and light,
The Sun, in human limbs arrayed, and brow
All radiant from his triumph in the fight.
The shaft has just been shot; the arrow bright
With an immortal's vengeance; in his eye
And nostril, beautiful disdain, and might,
And majesty flash their full lightnings by,
Developing in that one glance the Deity."


APOLLO AND DAPHNE

Daphne was Apollo's first love.  It was not brought about by
accident, but by the malice of Cupid.  Apollo saw the boy playing
with his bow and arrows; and being himself elated with his recent
victory over Python, he said to him, "What have you to do with
warlike weapons, saucy boy?  Leave them for hands worthy of them.
Behold the conquest I have won by means of them over the vast
serpent who stretched his poisonous body over acres of the plain!
Be content with your torch, child, and kindle up your flames, as
you call them, where you will, but presume not to meddle with my
weapons."

Venus's boy heard these words, and rejoined, ":Your arrows may
strike all things else, Apollo, but mine shall strike you.:" So
saying, he took his stand on a rock of Parnassus, and drew from
his quiver two arrows of different workmanship, one to excite
love, the other to repel it.  The former was of gold and sharp-
pointed, the latter blunt and tipped with lead.  With the leaden
shaft he struck the nymph Daphne, the daughter of the river god
Peneus, and with the golden one Apollo, through the heart.
Forthwith the god was seized with love for the maiden, and she
abhorred the thought of loving.  Her delight was in woodland
sports and in the spoils of the chase.  Many lovers sought her,
but she spurned them all, ranging the woods, and taking thought
neither of Cupid nor of Hymen.  Her father often said to her,
"Daughter, you owe me a son-in-law; you owe me grandchildren."
She, hating the thought of marriage as a crime, with her
beautiful face tinged all over with blushes, threw her arms
around her father's neck, and said, "Dearest father, grant me
this favor, that I may always remain unmarried, like Diana."  He
consented, but at the same time said, "Your own face will forbid
it."

Apollo loved her, and longed to obtain her; and he who gives
oracles to all in the world was not wise enough to look into his
own fortunes.  He saw her hair flung loose over her shoulders,
and said, "If so charming in disorder, what would it be if
arranged?"  He saw her eyes bright as stars; he saw her lips, and
was not satisfied with only seeing them.  He admired her hands
and arms bared to the shoulder, and whatever was hidden from view
he imagined more beautiful still.  He followed her; she fled,
swifter than the wind, and delayed not a moment at his
entreaties.  "Stay," said he, "daughter of Peneus; I am not a
foe.  Do not fly me as a lamb flies the wolf, or a dove the hawk.
It is for love I pursue you.  You make me miserable, for fear you
should fall and hurt yourself on these stones, and I should be
the cause.  Pray run slower, and I will follow slower.  I am no
clown, no rude peasant.  Jupiter is my father, and I am lord of
Delphos and Tenedos, and know all things, present and future.  I
am the god of song and the lyre.  My arrows fly true to the mark;
but alas!  An arrow more fatal than mine has pierced my heart!  I
am the god of medicine, and know the virtues of all healing
plants.  Alas!  I suffer a malady that no balm can cure!"

The nymph continued her flight, and left his plea half uttered.
And even as she fled she charmed him.  The wind blew her
garments, and her unbound hair streamed loose behind her.  The
god grew impatient to find his wooings thrown away, and, sped by
Cupid, gained upon her in the race.  It was like a hound pursuing
a hare, with open jaws ready to seize, while the feebler animal
darts forward, slipping from the very grasp.  So flew the god and
the virgin   he on the wings of love, and she on those of fear.
The pursuer is the more rapid, however, and gains upon her, and
his panting breath blows upon her hair.  Now her strength begins
to fail, and, ready to sink, she calls upon her father, the river
god: "Help me, Peneus!  Open the earth to enclose me, or change
my form, which has brought me into this danger!"

Scarcely had she spoken, when a stiffness seized all her limbs;
her bosom began to be enclosed in a tender bark; her hair became
leaves; her arms became branches; her feet stuck fast in the
ground, as roots; her face became a tree-top, retaining nothing
of its former self but its beauty.  Apollo stood amazed.  He
touched the stem, and felt the flesh tremble under the new bark.
He embraced the branches, and lavished kisses on the wood.  The
branches shrank from his lips.  "Since you cannot be my wife,"
said he, "you shall assuredly be my tree.  I will wear you for my
crown.  With you I will decorate my harp and my quiver; and when
the great Roman conquerors lead up the triumphal pomp to the
Capitol, you shall be woven into wreaths for their brows.  And,
as eternal youth is mine, you also shall be always green, and
your leaf know no decay."  The nymph, now changed into a laurel
tree, bowed its head in grateful acknowledgment.

Apollo was god of music and of poetry and also of medicine.  For,
as the poet Armstrong says, himself a physician:--

"Music exalts each joy, allays each grief,
Expels disease, softens every pain;
And hence the wise of ancient days adored
One power of physic, melody, and song."

The story of Apollo and Daphne is often alluded to by the poets.
Waller applies it to the case of one whose amatory verses, though
they did not soften the heart of his mistress, yet won for the
poet wide-spread fame.

"Yet what he sung in his immortal strain,
Though unsuccessful, was not sung in vain.
All but the nymph that should redress his wrong,
Attend his passion and approve his song.
Like Phoebus thus, acquiring unsought praise,
He caught at love and filled his arms with bays."

The following stanza from Shelley's Adonais alludes to Byron's
early quarrel with the reviewers:--

"The herded wolves, bold only to pursue;
The obscene ravens, clamorous o'er the dead;
The vultures, to the conqueror's banner true,
Who feed where Desolation first has fed.
And whose wings rain contagion; how they fled,
When like Apollo, from his golden bow,
The Pythian of the age one arrow sped
And smiled!  The spoilers tempt no second blow;
They fawn on the proud feet that spurn them as they go."



PYRAMUS AND THISBE

Pyramus was the handsomest youth, and Thisbe the fairest maiden,
in all Babylonia, where Semiramis reigned.  Their parents
occupied adjoining houses; and neighborhood brought the young
people together, and acquaintance ripened into love.  They would
gladly have married, but their parents forbade.  One thing,
however, they could not forbid   that love should glow with equal
ardor in the bosoms of both.  They conversed by signs and
glances, and the fire burned more intensely for being covered up.
In the wall that parted the two houses there was a crack, caused
by some fault in the structure.  No one had remarked it before,
but the lovers discovered it.  'What will love not discover?  It
afforded a passage to the voice; and tender messages used to pass
backward and forward through the gap.  As they stood, Pyramus on
this side, Thisbe on that, their breaths would mingle.  "Cruel
wall," they said, "why do you keep two lovers apart?  But we will
not be ungrateful.  We owe you, we confess, the privilege of
transmitting loving words to willing ears."  Such words they
uttered on different sides of the wall; and when night came and
they must say farewell, they pressed their lips upon the wall,
she on her side, he on his, as they could come no nearer.

One morning, when Aurora had put out the stars, and the sun had
melted the frost from the grass, they met at the accustomed spot.
Then, after lamenting their hard fate, they agreed that next
night, when all was still, they would slip away from watchful
eyes, leave their dwellings and walk out into the fields; and to
insure a meeting, repair to a well-known edifice, standing
without the city's bounds, called the tomb of Ninus, and that the
one who came first should await the other at the foot of a
certain tree.  It was a white mulberry tree and stood near a cool
spring.  All was agreed on, and they waited impatiently for the
sun to go down beneath the waters and night to rise up from them.
Then cautiously Thisbe stole forth, unobserved by the family, her
head covered with a veil, made her way to the monument and sat
down under the tree.  As she sat alone in the dim light of the
evening she descried a lioness, her jaws reeking with recent
slaughter, approaching the fountain to slake her thirst.  Thisbe
fled at the sight, and sought refuge in the hollow of a rock.  As
she fled she dropped her veil.  The lioness, after drinking at
the spring, turned to retreat to the woods, and seeing the veil
on the ground, tossed and rent it with her bloody mouth.

Pyramus, having been delayed, now approached the place of
meeting.  He saw in the sand the footsteps of the lion, and the
color fled from his cheeks at the sight.  Presently he found the
veil all rent and bloody.  "Oh, hapless girl," said he, "I have
been the cause of thy death!  Thou, more worthy of life than I,
hast fallen the first victim.  I will follow.  I am the guilty
cause, in tempting thee forth to a place of such peril, and not
being myself on the spot to guard thee.  Come forth, ye lions,
from the rocks, and tear this guilty body with your teeth" He
took up the veil, carried it with him to the appointed tree, and
covered it with kisses and with tears.  "My blood also shall
stain your texture," said he, and drawing his sword plunged it
into his heart.  The blood spurted from the wound, and tinged the
white mulberries of the tree all red; and sinking into the earth
reached the roots, so that the red color mounted through the
trunk to the fruit.

By this time, Thisbe, still trembling with fear, yet wishing not
to disappoint her lover, stepped cautiously forth, looking
anxiously for the youth, eager to tell him the danger she had
escaped.  When she came to the spot and saw the changed color of
the mulberries she doubted whether it was the same place.  While
she hesitated she saw the form of one struggling in the agonies
of death.  She started back, a shudder ran through her frame as a
ripple on the face of the still water when a sudden breeze sweeps
over it.  But as soon as she recognized her lover, she screamed
and beat her breast; embracing the lifeless body, pouring tears
into its wounds, and imprinting kisses on the cold lips.  "Oh,
Pyramus," she cried, "what has done this?  Answer me, Pyramus; it
is your own Thisbe that speaks.  Hear me, dearest, and lift that
drooping head!"  At the name of Thisbe, Pyramus opened his eyes,
then closed them again.  She saw her veil stained with blood and
the scabbard empty of its sword.  "Thy own hand has slain thee,
and for my sake," she said.  "I too can be brave for once, and my
love is as strong as thine.  I will follow thee in death, for I
have been the cause; and death, which alone could part us, shall
not prevent my joining thee.  And ye, unhappy parents of us both,
deny us not our united request.  As love and death have joined
us, let one tomb contain us.  And thou, tree, retain the marks of
slaughter.  Let thy berries still serve for memorials of our
blood."  So saying, she plunged the sword into her breast.  Her
parents acceded to her wish; the gods also ratified it.  The two
bodies were buried in one sepulchre, and the tree ever after
brought forth purple berries, as it does to this day.

Moore, in the Sylph's Ball, speaking of Davy's Safety Lamp, is
reminded of the wall that separated Thisbe and her lover:--

"O for that lamp's metallic gauze,
That curtain of protecting wire,
Which Davy delicately draws
Around illicit, dangerous fire!

"The wall he sets 'twixt Flame and Air,
(Like that which barred young Thisbe's bliss),
Through whose small holes this dangerous pair
May see each other, but not kiss."

In Mickle's translation of the Lusiad occurs the following
allusion to the story of Pyramus and Thisbe, and the
metamorphosis of the mulberries.  The poet is describing the
Island of Love.

"   here each gift Pomona's hand bestows
In cultured garden, free uncultured flows,
The flavor sweeter and the hue more fair
Than e'er was fostered by the hand of care.
The cherry here in shining crimson glows,
And stained with lover's blood, in pendent rows,
The mulberries o'erload the bending boughs."

If any of our young readers can be so hard-hearted as to enjoy a
laugh at the expense of poor Pyramus and Thisbe, they may find an
opportunity by turning to Shakespeare's play of Midsummer Night's
Dream, where it is most amusingly burlesqued.

Here is the description of the play and the characters by the
Prologue.

"Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show;
But wonder on, till truth makes all things plain.
This man is Pyramus, if you would know;
This lovely lady Thisby is certain.

This man with lime and roughcast, doth present
Wall, that vile Wall, which did these lovers sunder;
And through Wall's chink, poor souls, they are content
To whisper.  At the which let no man wonder.
This man, with lanthorn, dog and bush of thorn,
Presenteth Moonshine; for, if you will know,
By Moonshine did these lovers think no scorn
To meet at Ninus' tomb, there, there to woo.
This grisly beast, which by name Lion hight.
The trusty Thisby, coming first by night,
Did scare away, or rather did affright;
And, as she fled, her mantle she did fall,
Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain.

Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth and tall,
And finds his trusty Thisby's mantle slain;
Whereat with blade, with bloody blameful blade,
He bravely broached his boiling bloody breast;
And, Thisby, tarrying in mulberry shade,
His dagger drew and died."
Midsummer Night's Dream, v.1,128, et seq.


CEPHALUS AND PROCRIS

Cephalus was a beautiful youth and fond of manly sports.  He
would rise before the dawn to pursue the chase.  Aurora saw him
when she first looked forth, fell in love with him, and stole him
away.  But Cephalus was just married to a charming wife whom he
loved devotedly.  Her name was Procris.  She was a favorite of
Diana, the goddess of hunting, who had given her a dog which
could outrun every rival, and a javelin which would never fail of
its mark; and Procris gave these presents to her husband.
Cephalus was so happy in his wife that he resisted all the
entreaties of Aurora, and she finally dismissed him in
displeasure, saying, "Go, ungrateful mortal, keep your wife,
whom, if I am not much mistaken, you will one day be very sorry
you ever saw again."

Cephalus returned, and was as happy as ever in his wife and his
woodland sports.  Now it happened some angry deity had sent a
ravenous fox to annoy the country; and the hunters turned out in
great strength to capture it.  Their efforts were all in vain; no
dog could run it down; and at last they came to Cephalus to
borrow his famous dog, whose name was Lelaps.  No sooner was the
dog let loose than he darted off, quicker than their eye could
follow him.  If they had not seen his footprints in the sand they
would have thought he flew.  Cephalus and others stood on a hill
and saw the race.  The fox tried every art; he ran in a circle
and turned on his track, the dog close upon him, with open jaws,
snapping at his heels, but biting only the air.  Cephalus was
about to use his javelin, when suddenly he saw both dog and game
stop instantly.  The heavenly powers who had given both, were not
willing that either should conquer.  In the very attitude of life
and action they were turned into stone.  So lifelike and natural
did they look, you would have thought, as you looked at them,
that one was going to bark, the other to leap forward.

Cephalus, though he had lost his dog, still continued to take
delight in the chase.  He would go out at early morning, ranging
the woods and hills unaccompanied by any one, needing no help,
for his javelin was a sure weapon in all cases.  Fatigued with
hunting, when the sun got high he would seek a shady nook where a
cool stream flowed, and, stretched on the grass with his garments
thrown aside, would enjoy the breeze.  Sometimes he would say
aloud, "Come, sweet breeze, come and fan my breast, come and
allay the heat that burns me."  Some one passing by one day heard
him talking in this way to the air, and, foolishly believing that
he was talking to some maiden, went and told the secret to
Procris, Cephalus's wife.  Love is credulous.  Procris, at the
sudden shock, fainted away.  Presently recovering, she said, "It
cannot be true; I will not believe it unless I myself am a
witness to it."  So she waited, with anxious heart, till the next
morning, when Cephalus went to hunt as usual.  Then she stole out
after him, and concealed herself in the place where the informer
directed her.  Cephalus came as he was wont when tired with
sport, and stretched himself on the green bank, saying, "Come,
sweet breeze, come and fan me; you know how I love you!  You make
the groves and my solitary rambles delightful."  He was running
on in this way when he heard, or thought he heard, a sound as of
a sob in the bushes.  Supposing it some wild animal, he threw hie
javelin at the spot.  A cry from his beloved Procris told him
that the weapon had too surely met its mark.  He rushed to the
place, and found her bleeding and with sinking strength
endeavoring to draw forth from the wound the javelin, her own
gift.  Cephalus raised her from the earth, strove to stanch the
blood, and called her to revive and not to leave him miserable,
to reproach himself with her death.  She opened her feeble eyes,
and forced herself to utter these few words: "I implore you, if
you have ever loved me, if I have ever deserved kindness at your
hands, my husband, grant me this last request; do not marry that
odious Breeze!"  This disclosed the whole mystery; but alas!
What advantage to disclose it now?  She died; but her face wore a
calm expression, and she looked pityingly and forgivingly on her
husband when he made her understand the truth.

In Shakespeare's play just quoted, there is an allusion to
Cephalus and Procris, although rather badly spelt.

Pyramus says, "Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true."
Thisbe.  "As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you."

Moore, in his Legendary Ballads, has one on Cephalus and Procris,
beginning thus:--

"A hunter once in a grove reclined,
To shun the noon's bright eye,
And oft he wooed the wandering wind
To cool his brow with its sigh.
While mute lay even the wild bee's hum,
Nor breath could stir the aspen's hair,
His song was still, 'Sweet Air, O come!'
While Echo answered, 'Come, sweet Air!'"


Chapter III
Io and Callisto. Diana and Actaeon. The Story of Phaeton

Jupiter and Juno, although husband and wife, did not live
together very happily.  Jupiter did not love his wife very much,
and Juno distrusted her husband, and was always accusing him of
unfaithfulness.  One day she perceived that it suddenly grew
dark, and immediately suspected that her husband had raised a
cloud to hide some of his doings that would not bear the light.
She brushed away the cloud, and saw her husband, on the banks of
a glassy river, with a beautiful heifer standing near him.  Juno
suspected that the heifer's form concealed some fair nymph of
mortal mould.  This was indeed the case; for it was Io, the
daughter of the river god Inachus, whom Jupiter had been flirting
with, and, when he became aware of the approach of his wife, had
changed into that form.

Juno joined her husband, and noticing the heifer, praised its
beauty, and asked whose it was, and of what herd.  Jupiter, to
stop questions, replied that it was a fresh creation from the
earth.  Juno asked to have it as a gift.  What could Jupiter do?
He was loth to give his mistress to his wife; yet how refuse so
trifling a present as a simple heifer?  He could not, without
arousing suspicion; so he consented.  The goddess was not yet
relieved of her suspicions; and she delivered the heifer to
Argus, to be strictly watched.

Now Argus had a hundred eyes in his head, and never went to sleep
with more than two at a time, so that he kept watch of Io
constantly.  He suffered her to feed through the day, and at
night tied her up with a vile rope round her neck.  She would
have stretched out her arms to implore freedom of Argus, but she
had no arms to stretch out, and her voice was a bellow that
frightened even herself. She saw her father and her sisters, went
near them, and suffered them to pat her back, and heard them
admire her beauty.  Her father reached her a tuft o gras, and she
licked the outstretched hand.  She longed to make herself known
to him, and would have uttered her wish; but, alas!  words were
wanting.   At length she bethought herself of writing, and
inscribed her name   it was a short one   with her hoof on the
sand.  Inachus recognized it, and discovering that his daughter,
whom he had long sought in vain, was hidden under this disguise,
mourned over her, and, embracing her white neck, exclaimed,
"Alas!  My daughter, it would have been a less grief to have lost
you altogether!"  While he thus lamented, Argus, observing, came
and drove her away, and took his seat on a high bank, whence he
could see in every direction.

Jupiter was troubled at beholding the sufferings of his mistress,
and calling Mercury, told him to go and despatch Argus.  Mercury
made haste, put his winged slippers on his feet, and cap on his
head, took his sleep-producing wand, and leaped down from the
heavenly towers to the earth.  There he laid aside his wings, and
kept only his wand, with which he presented himself as a shepherd
driving his flock.  As he strolled on he blew upon his pipes.
These were what are called the Syrinx or Pandean pipes.  Argus
listened with delight, for he had never heard the instrument
before.  "Young man," said he, "come and take a seat by me on
this stone.  There is no better place for your flock to graze in
than hereabouts, and here is a pleasant shade such as shepherds
love."  Mercury sat down, talked, and told stories until it grew
late, and played upon his pipes his most soothing strains, hoping
to lull the watchful eyes to sleep, but all in vain; for Argus
still contrived to keep some of his eyes open, though he shut the
rest.

Among other stories, Mercury told him how the instrument on which
he played was invented.  "There was a certain nymph, whose name
was Syrinx, who was much beloved by the satyrs and spirits of the
wood; but she would have none of them, but was a faithful
worshipper of Diana, and followed the chase.  You would have
thought it was Diana herself, had you seen her in her hunting
dress, only that her bow was of horn and Diana's of silver.  One
day, as she was returning from the chase, Pan met her, told her
just this, and added more of the same sort.  She ran away,
without stopping to hear his compliments, and he pursued till she
came to the bank of the river, where he overtook her, and she had
only time to call for help on her friends, the water nymphs. They
heard and consented.  Pan threw his arms around what he supposed
to be the form of the nymph, and found he embraced only a tuft of
reeds!  As he breathed a sigh, the air sounded through the reeds,
and produced a plaintive melody.  The god, charmed with the
novelty and with the sweetness of the music, said 'Thus, then, at
least, you shall be mine.'  And he took some of the reeds, and
placing them together, of unequal lengths, side by side, made an
instrument which he called Syrinx, in honor of the nymph."
Before Mercury had finished his story, he saw Argus's eyes all
asleep.  As his head nodded forward on his breast, Mercury with
one stroke cut his neck through, and tumbled his head down the
rocks.  O hapless Argus!  The light of your hundred eyes is
quenched at once!  Juno took them and put them as ornaments on
the tail of her peacock, where they remain to this day.

But the vengeance of Juno was not yet satiated.  She sent a
gadfly to torment Io, who fled over the whole world from its
pursuit.  She swam through the Ionian Sea, which derived its name
from her, then roamed over the plains of Illyria, ascended Mount
Haemus, and crossed the Thracian strait, thence named the
Bosphorus (cow-bearer), rambled on through Scythia and the
country of the Cimmerians, and arrived at last on the banks of
the Nile.  At length Jupiter interceded for her, and, upon his
promising not to pay her any more attentions, Juno consented to
restore her to her form.  It was curious to see her gradually
recover her former self.  The coarse hairs fell from her body,
her horns shrunk up, her eyes grew narrower, her mouth shorter;
hands and fingers came instead of hoofs to her forefeet; in fine,
there was nothing left of the heifer except her beauty.  At first
she was afraid to speak for fear she should low, but gradually
she recovered her confidence, and was restored to her father and
sisters.

In a poem dedicated to Leigh Hunt, by Keats, the following
allusion to the story of Pan and Syrinx occurs:--

"So did he feel who pulled the boughs aside,
That we might look into a forest wide,
                                             *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *
Telling us how fair trembling Syrinx fled
Arcadian Pan, with such a fearful dread.
Poor nymph   poor Pan   how he did weep to find
Nought but a lovely sighing of the wind
Along the reedy stream; a half-heard strain,
Full of sweet desolation, balmy pain."


CALLISTO

Callisto was another maiden who excited the jealousy of Juno, and
the goddess changed her into a bear.  "I will take away," said
she, :"that beauty with which you have captivated my husband."
Down fell Callisto on her hands and knees; she tried to stretch
out her arms in supplication,-- they were already beginning to be
covered with black hair.  Her hands grew rounded, became armed
with crooked claws, and served for feet; her mouth, which Jove
used to praise for its beauty, became a horrid pair of jaws; her
voice, which if unchanged would have moved the heart to pity,
became a growl, more fit to inspire terror.  Yet her former
disposition remained, and, with continued groaning, she bemoaned
her fate, and stood upright as well as she could, lifting up her
paws to beg for mercy; and felt that Jove was unkind, though she
could not tell him so.  Ah, how often, afraid to stay in the
woods all night alone, she wandered about the neighborhood of her
former haunts; how often, frightened by the dogs, did she, so
lately a huntress, fly in terror from the hunters!  Often she
fled from the wild beasts, forgetting that she was now a wild
beast herself; and, bear as she was, was afraid of the bears.

One day a youth espied her as he was hunting.  She saw him and
recognized him as her own son, now grown a young man.  She
stopped, and felt inclined to embrace him.  As she was about to
approach, he, alarmed, raised his hunting spear, and was on the
point of transfixing her, when Jupiter, beholding, arrested the
crime, and, snatching away both of them, placed them in the
heavens as the Great and Little Bear.

Juno was in a rage to see her rival so set in honor, and hastened
to ancient Tethys and Oceanus, the powers of ocean, and, in
answer to their inquiries, thus told the cause of her coming; "Do
you ask why I, the queen of the gods, have left the heavenly
plains and sought your depths.  Learn that I am supplanted in
heaven,-- my place is given to another.  You will hardly believe
me; but look when night darkens the world, and you shall see the
two, of whom I have so much reason to complain, exalted to the
heavens, in that part where the circle is the smallest, in the
neighborhood of the pole.  Why should any one hereafter tremble
at the thought of offending Juno, when such rewards are the
consequence of my displeasure!  See what I have been able to
effect!  I forbade her to wear the human form,-- she is placed
among the stars!  So do my punishments result,-- such is the
extent of my power!  Better that she should have resumed her
former shape, as I permitted Io to do.  Perhaps he means to marry
her, and put me away!  But you, my foster parents, if you feel
for me, and see with displeasure this unworthy treatment of me,
show it, I beseech you, by forbidding this guilty couple from
coming into your waters."  The powers of the ocean assented, and
consequently the two constellations of the Great and Little Bear
move round and round in heaven, but never sink, as the other
stars do, beneath the ocean.

Milton alludes to the fact that the constellation of the Bear
never sets, when he says,

"Let my lamp at midnight hour
Be seen in some high lonely tower,
Where I may oft outwatch the Bear."
Il Penseroso

And Prometheus, in James Russell Lowell's poem, says,

"One after one the stars have risen and set,
Sparkling upon the hoar-frost of my chain;
The Bear that prowled all night about the fold
Of the North Star, hath shrunk into his den,
Scared by the blithsome footsteps of the dawn."

The last star in the tail of the Little Bear is the Pole star,
called also the Cynosure.  Milton says,

"Straight mine eye hath caught new pleasures
While the landscape round it measures.
                                             *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *
Towers and battlements it sees
Bosomed high in tufted trees,
Where perhaps some beauty lies
The Cynosure of neighboring eyes."
L'Allegro.

The reference here is both to the Pole-star as the guide of
mariners, and to the magnetic attraction of the North.  He calls
it also the "Star of Aready," because Callisto's boy was named
Arcas, and they lived in Arcadia.  In Milton's Comus, the elder
brother, benighted in the woods, says,

"Some gentle taper!
Through a rush candle, from
the wicker hole
Of some clay habitation,
visit us
With thy long levelled rule
of streaming light,
And thou shalt be our star of Aready,
Or Tyrian Chynsure."


DIANA AND ACTAEON

It was midday, and the sun stood equally distant from either
goal, when young Actaeon, son of King Cadmus, thus addressed the
youths who with him were hunting the stag in the mountains:--

"Friends, our nets and our weapons are wet with the blood of our
victims; we have had sport enough for one day, and tomorrow we
can renew our labors.  Now, while Phoebus parches the earth, let
us put by our instruments and indulge ourselves with rest."

There was a valley thickly enclosed with cypresses and pines,
sacred to the huntress-queen, Diana.  In the extremity of the
valley was a cave, not adorned with art, but nature had
counterfeited art in its construction, for she had turned the
arch of its roof with stones as delicately fitted as if by the
hand of man.  A fountain burst out from one side, whose open
basin was bounded by a grassy rim.  Here the goddess of the woods
used to come when weary with hunting and lave her virgin limbs in
the sparkling water.

One day, having repaired thither with her nymphs, she handed her
javelin, her quiver, and her bow to one, her robe to another,
while a third unbound the sandals from her feet.  Then Crocale,
the most skilful of them, arranged her hair, and Nephele, Hyale,
and the rest drew water in capacious urns.  While the goddess was
thus employed in the labors of the toilet, behold, Actaeon,
having quitted his companions, and rambling without any especial
object, came to the place, led thither by his destiny.  As he
presented himself at the entrance of the cave, the nymphs, seeing
a man, screamed and rushed towards the goddess to hide her with
their bodies.  But she was taller than the rest, and overtopped
them all by a head.  Such a color as tinges the clouds at sunset
or at dawn came over the countenance of Diana thus taken by
surprise.  Surrounded as she was by her nymphs, she yet turned
half away, and sought with a sudden impulse for her arrows.  As
they were not at hand, she dashed the water into the face of the
intruder, adding these words: "Now go and tell, if you can, that
you have seen Diana unapparelled."  Immediately a pair of
branching stag's horns grew out of his head, his neck gained in
length, his ears grew sharp-pointed, his hands became feet, his
arms long legs, his body was covered with a hairy spotted hide.
Fear took the place of his former boldness, and the hero fled.
He could not but admire his own speed; but when he saw his horns
in the water, "Ah, wretched me!: he would have said, but no sound
followed the effort.  He groaned, and tears flowed down the face
that had taken the place of his own.  Yet his consciousness
remained.  What shall he do?   Go home to seek the palace, or lie
hid in the woods?  The latter he was afraid, the former he was
ashamed, to do.  While he hesitated the dogs saw him.  First
Melampus, a Spartan dog, gave the signal with his bark, then
Pamphagus, Dorceus, Lelaps, Theron, Nape, Tigris, and all the
rest, rushed after him swifter than the wind.  Over rocks and
cliffs, through mountain gorges that seemed impracticable, he
fled, and they followed.  Where he had often chased the stag and
cheered on his pack, his pack now chased him, cheered on by his
own huntsmen.  He longed to cry out, "I am Actaeon; recognize
your master!"  But the words came not at his will.  The air
resounded with the bark of the dogs.  Presently one fastened on
his back, another seized his shoulder.  While they held their
master, the rest of the pack came up and buried their teeth in
his flesh.  He groaned,   not in a human voice, yet certainly not
in a stag's,   and, falling on his knees, raised his eyes, and
would have raised his arms in supplication, if he had had them.
His friends and fellow-huntsmen cheered on the dogs, and looked
every where for Actaeon, calling on him to join the sport.  At
the sound of his name, he turned his head, and heard them regret
that he should be away.  He earnestly wished he was.  He would
have been well pleased to see the exploits of his dogs, but to
feel them was too much.  They were all around him, rending and
tearing; and it was not till they had torn his life out that the
anger of Diana was satisfied.

In the "Epic of Hades" there is a description of Actaeon and his
change of form.  Perhaps the most beautiful lines in it are when
Actaeon, changed to a stag, first hears his own hounds and flees.

"But as I gazed, and careless turned and passed
Through the thick wood, forgetting what had been,
And thinking thoughts no longer, swift there came
A mortal terror; voices that I knew.
My own hounds' bayings that I loved before,
As with them often o'er the purple hills
I chased the flying hart from slope to slope,
Before the slow sun climbed the eastern peaks,
Until the swift sun smote the western plain;
Whom often I had cheered by voice and glance,
Whom often I had checked with hand and thong;
Grim followers, like the passions, firing me,
True servants, like the strong nerves, urging me
On many a fruitless chase, to find and take
Some too swift-fleeting beauty, faithful feet
And tongues, obedient always: these I knew
Clothed with a new-born force and vaster grown,
And stronger than their master; and I thought,
What if they tore me with their jaws, nor knew
That once I ruled them,   brute pursuing brute,
And I the quarry?  Then I turned and fled
If it was I indeed that feared and fled
Down the long glades, and through the tangled brakes,
Where scarce the sunlight pierced; fled on and on,
And panted, self-pursued.  But evermore
The dissonant music which I knew so sweet,
When by the windy hills, the echoing vales
And whispering pines it rang; now far, now near
As from my rushing steed I leant and cheered
With voice and horn the chase; this brought to me
Fear of I knew not what, which bade me fly,
Fly always, fly; but when my heart stood still,
And all my limbs were stiffened as I fled,
Just as the white moon ghost-like climbed the sky,
Nearer they came and nearer, baying loud,
With bloodshot eyes and red jaws dripping foam;
And when I strove to check their savagery,
Speaking with words; no voice articulate came,
Only a dumb, low bleat.  Then all the throng
Leapt swift upon me and tore me as I lay,
And left me man again."

In Shelley's poem Adonais is the following allusion to the story
of Actaeon:--

"Midst others of less note came one frail form,
A phantom among men; companionless
As the last cloud of an expiring storm,
Whose thunder is its knell; he, as I guess,
Had gazed on Nature's naked loveliness,
Actaeon-like, and now he fled astray
With feeble steps o'er the world's wilderness;
And his own Thoughts, along that rugged way,
Pursued like raging hounds their father and their prey."
Adonais, stanza 31.

The allusion is probably to Shelley himself.

LATONA AND THE RUSTICS

Some thought the goddess in this instance more severe than was
just, while others praised her conduct as strictly consistent
with her virgin dignity.  As usual, the recent event brought
older ones to mind, and one of the bystanders told this story.
"Some countrymen of Lycia once insulted the goddess Latona, but
not with impunity.  When I was young, my father, who had grown
too old for active labors, sent me to Lycia to drive thence some
choice oxen, and there I saw the very pond and marsh where the
wonder happened.  Near by stood an ancient altar, black with the
smoke of sacrifice and almost buried among the reeds.  I inquired
whose altar it might be, whether of Faunus or the Naiads or some
god of the neighboring mountain, and one of the country people
replied, 'No mountain or river god possesses this altar, but she
whom royal Juno in her jealousy drove from land to land, denying
her any spot of earth whereon to rear her twins.  Bearing in her
arms the infant deities, Latona reached this land, weary with her
burden and parched with thirst.  By chance she espied in the
bottom of the valley this pond of clear water, where the country
people were at work gathering willows and osiers.  The goddess
approached, and kneeling on the bank would have slaked her thirst
in the cool stream, but the rustics forbade her.  'Why do you
refuse me water?' said she; 'water is free to all.  Nature allows
no one to claim as property the sunshine, the air, or the water.
I come to take my share of the common blessing.  Yet I ask it of
you as a favor.  I have no intention of washing my limbs in it,
weary though they be, but only to quench my thirst.  My mouth is
so dry that I can hardly speak.  A draught of water would be
nectar to me; it would revive me, and I would own myself indebted
to you for life itself.  Let these infants move your pity, who
stretch out their little arms as if to plead for me'; and the
children, as it happened, were stretching out their arms.

"Who would not have been moved with these gentle words of the
goddess?  But these clowns persisted in their rudeness; they even
added jeers and threats of violence if she did not leave the
place.  Nor was this all.  They waded into the pond and stirred
up the mud with their feet, so as to make the water unfit to
drink.  Latona was so angry that she ceased to feel her thirst.
She no longer supplicated the clowns, but lifting her hands to
heaven exclaimed, 'May they never quit that pool, but pass their
lives there!'  And it came to pass accordingly.  They now live in
the water, sometimes totally submerged, then raising their heads
above the surface, or swimming upon it.  Sometimes they come out
upon the bank, but soon leap back again into the water.  They
still use their base voices in railing, and though they have the
water all to themselves, are not ashamed to croak in the midst of
it.  Their voices are harsh, their throats bloated, their mouths
have become stretched by constant railing, their necks have
shrunk up and disappeared, and their heads are joined to their
bodies.  Their backs are green, their disproportioned bellies
white, and in short they are now frogs, and dwell in the slimy
pool."

This story explains the allusion in one of Milton's sonnets, "On
the detraction which followed upon his writing certain
treatises."

"I did but prompt the age to quit their clogs
By the known laws of ancient liberty,.
When straight a barbarous noise environs me
Of owls and cuckoos, asses, apes and dogs.
As when those hinds that were transformed to frogs
Railed at Latona's twin-born progeny,
Which after held the sun and moon in fee."

The persecution which Latona experienced from Juno is alluded to
in the story.  The tradition was that the future mother of Apollo
and Diana, flying from the wrath of Juno, besought all the
islands of the Aegean to afford her a place of rest, but all
feared too much the potent queen of heaven to assist her rival.
Delos alone consented to become the birthplace of the future
deities.  Delos was then a floating island; but when Latona
arrived there, Jupiter fastened it with adamantine chains to the
bottom of the sea, that it might be a secure resting place for
his beloved.  Byron alludes to Delos in his Don Juan:--

"The isles of Greece!  The isles of Greece!
Where burning Sappho loved and sung,
Where grew the arts of war and peace,
Where Delos rose and Phoebus sprung!"


PHAETON

Epaphus was the son of Jupiter and Io.  Phaeton, child of the
Sun, was one day boasting to him of his high descent and of his
father Phoebus.  Epaphus could not bear it.  "Foolish fellow,"
said he "you believe your mother in all things, and you are
puffed up by your pride in a false father."  Phaeton went in rage
and shame and reported this to his mother, Clymene.  "If," said
he, "I am indeed of heavenly birth, give me, mother, some proof
of it, and establish my claim to the honor."  Clymene stretched
forth her hands towards the skies, and said, "I call to witness
the Sun which looks down upon us, that I have told you the truth.
If I speak falsely, let this be the last time I behold his light.
But it needs not much labor to go and inquire for yourself; the
land whence the sun rises lies next to ours.  Go and demand of
him whether he will own you as a son" Phaeton heard with delight.
He travelled to India, which lies directly in the regions of
sunrise; and, full of hope and pride, approached the goal whence
the Sun begins his course.

The palace of the Sun stood reared aloft on columns, glittering
with gold and precious stones, while polished ivory formed the
ceilings, and silver the doors.  The workmanship surpassed the
material; for upon the walls Vulcan had represented earth, sea
and skies, with their inhabitants.  In the sea were the nymphs,
some sporting in the waves, some riding on the backs of fishes,
while others sat upon the rocks and dried their sea-green hair.
Their faces were not all alike, nor yet unlike,   but such as
sisters' ought to be.  The earth had its towns and forests and
rivers and rustic divinities.  Over all was carved the likeness
of the glorious heaven; and on the silver doors the twelve signs
of the zodiac, six on each side.

Clymene's son advanced up the steep ascent, and entered the halls
of his disputed father.  He approached the paternal presence, but
stopped at a distance, for the light was more than he could bear.
Phoebus, arrayed in a purple vesture, sat on a throne which
glittered as with diamonds.  On his right hand and his left stood
the Day, the Month, and the Year, and, at regular intervals, the
Hours.  Spring stood with her head crowned with flowers, and
Summer, with garment cast aside, and a garland formed of spears
of ripened grain, and Autumn, with his feet stained with grape
juice, and icy Winter, with his hair stiffened with hoar frost.
Surrounded by these attendants, the Sun, with the eye that sees
every thing, beheld the youth dazzled with the novelty and
splendor of the scene, and inquired the purpose of his errand.
The youth replied, "Oh, light of the boundless world, Phoebus, my
father,   if you permit me to use that name,   give me some
proof, I beseech you, by which I may be known as yours."  He
ceased; and his father, laying aside the beams that shone all
around his head, bade him approach, and embracing him, said, "My
son, you deserve not to be disowned, and I confirm what your
mother has told you.  To put an end to your doubts, ask what you
will, the gift shall be yours.  I call to witness that dreadful
lake, which I never saw, but which we gods swear by in our most
solemn engagements."  Phaeton immediately asked to be permitted
for one day to drive the chariot of the sun.  The father repented
of his promise; thrice and four times he shook his radiant head
in warning.  "I have spoken rashly," said he; "only this request
I would fain deny.  I beg you to withdraw it.  It is not a safe
boon, nor one, my Phaeton, suited to your youth and strength.
Your lot is mortal, and you ask what is beyond a mortal's power.
In your ignorance you aspire to do that which not even the gods
themselves may do.  None but myself may drive the flaming car of
day; not even Jupiter, whose terrible right arm hurls the thunder
bolts.  The first part of the way is steep, and such as the
horses when fresh in the morning can hardly climb; the middle is
high up in the heavens, whence I myself can scarcely, without
alarm, look down and behold the earth and sea stretched beneath
me.  The last part of the road descends rapidly, and requires
most careful driving.  Tethys, who is waiting to receive me,
often trembles for me lest I should fall headlong.  Add to all
this, the heaven is all the time turning round and carrying the
stars with it.  I have to be perpetually on my guard lest that
movement, which sweeps everything else along, should hurry me
also away.  Suppose I should lend you the chariot, what would you
do?  Could you keep your course while the sphere was revolving
under you?  Perhaps you think that there are forests and cities,
the abodes of gods, and palaces and temples on the way.  On the
contrary, the road is through the midst of frightful monsters.
You pass by the horns of the Bull, in front of the Archer, and
near the Lion's jaws, and where the Scorpion stretches its arms
in one direction and the Crab in another.  Nor will you find it
easy to guide those horses, with their breasts full of fire which
they breathe forth from their mouths and nostrils.  I can
scarcely govern them myself, when they are unruly and resist the
reins.  Beware, my son, lest I should give you a fatal gift;
recall your request while yet you may.  Do you ask me for proof
that you are sprung from my blood?  I give you a proof in my
fears for you.  Look at my face,-- I would that you could look
into my breast, you would there see all a father's anxiety.
Finally," he continued, "look round the world and choose whatever
you will of what earth or sea contains most precious,   ask it
and fear no refusal.  This only I pray you not to urge.  It is
not honor, but destruction you seek.  Why do you hang round my
neck and still entreat me?  You shall have it if you persist,
the oath is sworn and must be kept,   but I beg you to choose
more wisely."

He ended; but the youth rejected all admonition, and held to his
demand.  So, having resisted as long as he could, Phoebus at last
led the way to where stood the lofty chariot.

It was of gold, the gift of Vulcan; the axle was of gold, the
pole and wheels of gold, the spokes of silver.  Along the seat
were rows of chrysolites and diamonds, which reflected all around
the brightness of the sun.  While the daring youth gazed in
admiration, the early Dawn threw open the purple doors of the
east, and showed the pathway strewn with roses.  The stars
withdrew, marshalled by the Daystar, which last of all retired
also.  The father, when he saw the earth beginning to glow, and
the Moon preparing to retire, ordered the Hours to harness up the
horses.  They obeyed, and led forth from the lofty stalls the
steeds full fed with ambrosia, and attached the reins.  Then the
father bathed the face of his son with a powerful unguent, and
made him capable of enduring the brightness of the flame.  He set
the rays on his head, and, with a foreboding sigh, said, "If, my
son, you will in this at least heed my advice, spare the whip and
hold tight the reins.  They go fast enough of their own accord;
the labor is to hold them in.  You are not to take the straight
road directly between the five circles, but turn off to the left.
Keep within the limit of the middle zone, and avoid the northern
and the southern alike.  You will see the marks of the wheels,
and they will serve to guide you.  And, that the skies and the
earth may each receive their due share of heat, go not too high,
or you will burn the heavenly dwellings, nor too low, or you will
set the earth on fire; the middle course is safest and best.  And
now I leave you to your chance, which I hope will plan better for
you than you have done for yourself.  Night is passing out of the
western gates and we can delay no longer.  Take the reins; but if
at last your heart fails you, and you will benefit by my advice,
stay where you are in safety, and suffer me to light and warm the
earth."  The agile youth sprang into the chariot, stood erect and
grasped the reins with delight, pouring out thanks to his
reluctant parent.

Meanwhile the horses fill the air with their snortings and fiery
breath, and stamp the ground impatient.  Now the bars are let
down, and the boundless plain of the universe lies open before
them.  They dart forward and cleave the opposing clouds, and
outrun the morning breezes which started from the same eastern
goal.  The steeds soon perceived that the load they drew was
lighter than usual; and as a ship without ballast is tossed
hither and thither on the sea, so the chariot, without its
accustomed weight, was dashed about as if empty.  They rush
headlong and leave the travelled road.  He is alarmed, and knows
not how to guide them; nor, if he knew, has he the power.  Then,
for the first time, the Great and Little Bear were scorched with
heat, and would fain, if it were possible, have plunged into the
water; and the Serpent which lies coiled up round the north pole,
torpid and harmless, grew warm, and with warmth felt its rage
revive.  Bootes, they say, fled away, though encumbered with his
plough, and all unused to rapid motion.

When hapless Phaeton looked down upon the earth, now spreading in
vast extent beneath him, he grew pale and his knees shook with
terror.  In spite of the glare all around him, the sight of his
eyes grew dim.  He wished he had never touched his father's
horses, never learned his parentage, never prevailed in his
request.  He is borne along like a vessel that flies before a
tempest, when the pilot can do no more and betakes himself to his
prayers.  What shall he do?  Much of the heavenly road is left
behind, but more remains before.  He turns his eyes from one
direction to the other; now to the goal whence he began his
course, now to the realms of sunset which he is not destined to
reach.  He loses his self-command, and knows not what to do,
whether to draw tight the reins or throw them loose; he forgets
the names of the horses.  He sees with terror the monstrous forms
scattered over the surface of heaven.  Here the Scorpion extended
his two great arms, with his tail and crooked claws stretching
over two signs of the zodiac.  When the boy beheld him, reeking
with poison and menacing with his fangs, his courage failed, and
the reins fell from his hands.  The horses, feeling the reins
loose on their backs, dashed headlong, and unrestrained went off
into unknown regions of the sky, in among the stars, hurling the
chariot over pathless places, now up in high heaven, now down
almost to the earth.  The moon saw with astonishment her
brother's chariot running beneath her own.  The clouds begin to
smoke, and the mountain tops take fire; the fields are parched
with heat, the plants wither, the trees with their leafy branches
burn, the harvest is ablaze!  But these are small things.  Great
cities perished, with their walls and towers; whole nations with
their people were consumed to ashes!  The forest-clad mountains
burned, Athos and Taurus and Tmolus and OEte; Ida, once
celebrated for fountains, but now all dry; the Muses' mountain
Helicon, and Haemus; AEtna, with fires within and without, and
Parnassus, with his two peaks, and Rhodope, forced at last to
part with his snowy crown.  Her cold climate was no protection to
Scythia, Caucasus burned, and Ossa and Pindus, and, greater than
both, Olympus; the Alps high in air, and the Apennines crowned
with clouds.

Then Phaeton beheld the world on fire, and felt the heat
intolerable.  The air he breathed was like the air of a furnace
and full of burning ashes, and the smoke was of a pitchy
darkness.  He dashed forward he knew not whither.  Then, it is
believed, the people of AEthiopia became black by the blood being
forced so suddenly to the surface, and the Libyan desert was
dried up to the condition in which it remains to this day.  The
Nymphs of the fountains, with dishevelled hair, mourned their
waters, nor were the rivers safe beneath their banks; Tanais
smoked, and Caicus, Xanthus and Meander.  Babylonian Euphrates
and Ganges, Tagus with golden sands, and Caijster where the swans
resort.  Nile fled away and hid his head in the desert, and there
it still remains concealed.  Where he used to discharge his
waters through seven mouths into the sea, there seven dry
channels alone remained.  The earth cracked open, and through the
chinks light broke into Tartarus, and frightened the king of
shadows and his queen.  The sea shrank up.  Where before was
water, it became a dry plain; and the mountains that lie beneath
the waves lifted up their heads and became islands.  The fishes
sought the lowest depths, and the dolphins no longer ventured as
usual to sport on the surface.  Even Nereus, and his wife Doris,
with the Nereids, their daughters, sought the deepest caves for
refuge.  Thrice Neptune essayed to raise his head above the
surface and thrice was driven back by the heat.  Earth,
surrounded as she was by waters, yet with head and shoulders
bare, screening her face with her hand, looked up to heaven, and
with a husky voice called on Jupiter.

"O ruler of the gods, if I have deserved this treatment, and it
is your will that I perish with fire, why withhold your
thunderbolts?  Let me at least fall by your hand.  Is this the
reward of my fertility, of my obedient service?  Is it for this
that I have supplied herbage for cattle, and fruits for men, and
frankincense for your altars?  But if I am unworthy of regard,
what has my brother Ocean done to deserve such a fate?  If
neither of us can excite your pity, think, I pray you, of your
own heaven, and behold how both the poles are smoking which
sustain your palace, which must fall if they be destroyed.  Atlas
faints, and scarce holds up his burden.  If sea, earth, and
heaven perish, we fall into ancient Chaos.  Save what yet remains
to us from the devouring flame.  Oh, take thought for our
deliverance in this awful moment!"

Thus spoke Earth, and overcome with heat and thirst, could say no
more.  Then Jupiter Omnipotent, calling to witness all the gods,
including him who had lent the chariot, and showing them that all
was lost unless some speedy remedy were applied, mounted the
lofty tower from whence he diffuses clouds over the earth, and
hurls the forked lightnings.  But at that time not a cloud was to
be found to interpose for a screen to earth, nor was a shower
remaining unexhausted.  He thundered, and brandishing a
lightning-bolt in his right hand launched it against the
charioteer, and struck him at the same moment from his seat and
from existence!  Phaeton, with his hair on fire, fell headlong,
like a shooting star which marks the heavens with its brightness
as it falls, and Eridanus, the great river, received him and
cooled his burning frame.  The Italian Naiads reared a tomb for
him, and inscribed these words upon the stone:

"Driver of Phoebus' chariot, Phaeton,
Struck by Jove's thunder, rests beneath this stone.
He could not rule his father's car of fire,
Yet was it much so nobly to aspire."

His sisters, the Heliades, as they lamented his fate were turned
into poplar trees, on the banks of the river, and their tears,
which continued to flow, became amber as they dropped into the
stream,

One of Prior's best remembered poems is that on the Female
Phaeton, from which we quote the last verse.

Kitty has been imploring her mother to allow her to go out into
the world as her friends have done, if only for once.

"Fondness prevailed, mamma gave way;
Kitty, at heart's desire,
Obtained the chariot for a day,
And set the world on fire."

Milman, in his poem of Samor, makes the following allusion to
Phaeton's story:--

"As when the palsied universe aghast
Lay .... mute and still,
When drove, so poets sing, the sun-born youth
Devious through Heaven's affrighted signs his sire's
Ill-granted chariot.  Him the Thunderer hurled
>From th'empyrean headlong to the gulf
Of the half-parched Eridanus, where weep
Even now the sister trees their amber tears
O'er Phaeton untimely dead."

In the beautiful lines of Walter Savage Lando describing the sea-
shell, there is an allusion to the sun's palace and chariot.  The
water-nymph says,

"  I have sinuous shells of pearly hue
Within, and things that lustre have imbibed
In the sun's palace porch, where when unyoked
His chariot-wheel stands midway in the wave.
Shake one and it awakens; then apply
Its polished lip to your attentive car,
And it remembers its August abodes,
And murmurs as the ocean murmurs there."
Gebir, Book 1


Chapter IV
Midas. Baucis and Philemon. Pluto and Proserpine.

Bacchus, on a certain occasion, found his old school master and
foster father, Silenus, missing.  The old man had been drinking,
and in that state had wandered away, and was found by some
peasants, who carried him to their king, Midas.  Midas recognized
him, and treated him hospitably, entertaining him for ten days
and nights with an unceasing round of jollity.  On the eleventh
day he brought Silenus back, and restored him in safety to his
pupil.  Whereupon Bacchus offered Midas his choice of whatever
reward he might wish.  He asked that whatever he might touch
should be changed into GOLD.  Bacchus consented, though sorry
that he had not made a better choice.  Midas went his way,
rejoicing in his newly acquired power, which he hastened to put
to the test.  He could scarce believe his eyes when he found that
a twig of an oak, which he plucked from the branch, became gold
in his hand.  He took up a stone   it changed to gold.  He
touched a sod   it did the same.  He took an apple from the tree
  you would have thought he had robbed the garden of the
Hesperides.  His joy knew no bounds, and as soon as he got home,
he ordered the servants to set a splendid repast on the table.
Then he found to his dismay that whether he touched bread, it
hardened in his hand; or put a morsel to his lips, it defied his
teeth.  He took a glass of wine, but it flowed down his throat
like melted gold.

In consternation at the unprecedented affliction, he strove to
divest himself of his power; he hated the gift he had lately
coveted.  But all in vain; starvation seemed to await him.  He
raised his arms, all shining with gold, in prayer to Bacchus,
begging to be delivered from his glittering destruction.
Bacchus, merciful deity, heard and consented.  "Go," said he, "to
the river Pactolus, trace the stream to its fountain-head, there
plunge in your head and body and wash away your fault and its
punishment."  He did so, and scarce had he touched the waters
before the gold-creating power passed into them, and the river
sands became changed into GOLD, as they remain to this day.

Thenceforth Midas, hating wealth and splendor, dwelt in the
country, and became a worshipper of Pan, the god of the fields.
On a certain occasion Pan had the temerity to compare his music
with that of Apollo, and to challenge the god of the lyre to a
trial of skill.  The challenge was accepted, and Tmolus, the
mountain-god, was chosen umpire.  Tmolus took his seat and
cleared away the trees from his ears to listen.  At a given
signal Pan blew on his pipes, and with his rustic melody gave
great satisfaction to himself and his faithful follower, Midas,
who happened to be present.  Then Tmolus turned his head toward
the sun-god, and all his trees turned with him.  Apollo rose, his
brow wreathed with Parnassian laurel, while his robe of Tyrian
purple swept the ground.  In his left hand he held the lyre, and
with his right hand struck the strings.  Ravished with the
harmony, Tmolus at once awarded the victory to the god of the
lyre, and all but Midas acquiesced in the judgment.  He
dissented, and questioned the justice of the award.  Apollo would
not suffer such a depraved pair of ears any longer to wear the
human form, but caused them to increase in length, grow hairy,
within and without, and to become movable, on their roots; in
short, to be on the perfect pattern of those of an ass.

Mortified enough was King Midas at this mishap; but he consoled
himself with the thought that it was possible to hide his
misfortune, which he attempted to do by means of an ample turban
or headdress.  But his hairdresser of course knew the secret.  He
was charged not to mention it, and threatened with dire
punishment if he presumed to disobey.  But he found it too much
for his discretion to keep such a secret; so he went out into the
meadow, dug a hole in the ground, and stooping down, whispered
the story, and covered it up. Before long a thick bed of reeds
sprang up in the meadow, and as soon as it had gained its growth,
began whispering the story, and has continued to do so, from that
day to this, with every breeze which passes over the place.

The story of King Midas has been told by others with some
variations.  Dryden, in the Wife of Bath's Tale, makes Midas'
queen the betrayer of the secret.

"This Midas knew, and durst communicate
To none but to his wife his ears of state."

Midas was king of Phrygia.  He was the son of Gordius, a poor
countryman, who was taken by the people and made king, in
obedience to the command of the oracle, which had said that their
future king should come in a wagon.  While the people were
deliberating, Gordius with his wife and son came driving his
wagon into the public square.

Gordius, being made king, dedicated his wagon to the deity of the
oracle, and tied it up in its place with a fast knot.  This was
the celebrated GORDIAN KNOT, of which, in after times it was
said, that whoever should untie it should become lord of all
Asia.  Many tried to untie it, but none succeeded, till Alexander
the Great, in his career of conquest, came to Phrygia.  He tried
his skill with as ill success as the others, till growing
impatient he drew his sword and cut the knot.  When he afterwards
succeeded in subjecting all Asia to his sway, people began to
think that he had complied with the terms of the oracle according
to its true meaning.

BAUCIS AND PHILEMON

On a certain hill in Phrygia stand a linden tree and an oak,
enclosed by a low wall.  Not far from the spot is a marsh,
formerly good habitable land, but now indented with pools, the
resort of fen-birds and cormorants.  Once on a time, Jupiter, in
human shape, visited this country, and with him his son Mercury
(he of the caduceus), without his wings.  They presented
themselves at many a door as weary travellers, seeking rest and
shelter, but found all closed, for it was late, and the
inhospitable inhabitants would not rouse themselves to open for
their reception.  At last a humble mansion received them, a small
thatched cottage, where Baucis, a pious old dame, and her husband
Philemon, united when young, had grown old together.  Not ashamed
of their poverty, they made it endurable by moderate desires and
kind dispositions.  One need not look there for master or for
servant; they two were the whole household, master and servant
alike.  When the two heavenly guests crossed the humble
threshold, and bowed their heads to pass under the low door, the
old man placed a seat, on which Baucis, bustling and attentive,
spread a cloth, and begged them to sit down.  Then she raked out
the coals from the ashes, kindled up a fire, and fed it with
leaves and dry bark, and with her scanty breath blew it into a
flame.  She brought out of a corner split sticks and dry
branches, broke them up, and placed them under the small kettle.
Her husband collected some pot-herbs in the garden, and she shred
them from the stalks, and prepared them for the pot He reached
down with a forked stick a flitch of bacon hanging in the
chimney, cut a small piece, and put it in the pot to boil with
the herbs, setting away the rest for another time.  A beechen
bowl was filled with warm water that their guests might wash.
While all was doing they beguiled the time with conversation.

On the bench designed for the guests was laid a cushion stuffed
with sea-weed; and a cloth, only produced on great occasions, but
old and coarse enough, was spread over that.  The old woman, with
her apron on, with trembling hand set the table.  One leg was
shorter than the rest, but a shell put under restored the level.
When fixed, she rubbed the table down with some sweet-smelling
herbs.  Upon it she set some olives, Minerva's-fruit, some
cornel-berries preserved in vinegar, and added radishes and
cheese, with eggs lightly cooked in the ashes.  All were served
in earthen dishes, and an earthenware pitcher, with wooden cups,
stood beside them.  When all was ready, the stew, smoking hot,
was set on the table.  Some wine, not of the oldest, was added;
and for dessert, apples and wild honey; and over and above all,
friendly faces, and simple but hearty welcome.

Now while the repast proceeded, the old folks were astonished to
see that the wine, as fast as it was poured out, renewed itself
in the pitcher, of its own accord.  Struck with terror, Baucis
and Philemon recognized their heavenly guests, fell on their
knees, and with clasped hands implored forgiveness for their poor
entertainment.  There was an old goose, which they kept as the
guardian of their humble cottage; and they bethought them to make
this a sacrifice in honor of their guests.  But the goose, too
nimble for the old folks, eluded their pursuit with the aid of
feet and wings, and at last took shelter between the gods
themselves.  They forbade it to be slain; and spoke in these
words: "We are gods.  This inhospitable village shall pay the
penalty of its impiety; you alone shall go free from the
chastisement.  Quit your house, and come with us to the top of
yonder hill."  They hastened to obey, and staff in hand, labored
up the steep ascent. They had come within an arrow's flight of
the top, when turning their eyes below, they beheld all the
country sunk in a lake, only their own house left standing.
While they gazed with wonder at the sight, and lamented the fate
of their neighbors, that old house of theirs was changed into a
TEMPLE.  Columns took the place of the corner-posts, the thatch
grew yellow and appeared a gilded roof, the floors became marble,
the doors were enriched with carving and ornaments of gold.  Then
spoke Jupiter in benignant accents: "Excellent old man, and woman
worthy of such a husband, speak, tell us your wishes; what favor
have you to ask of us?"  Philemon took counsel with Baucis a few
moments; then declared to the gods their united wish.  "We ask to
be priests and guardians of this your temple; and since here we
have passed our lives in love and concord, we wish that one and
the same hour may take us both from life, that I may not live to
see her grave, nor be laid in my own by her."  Their prayer was
granted.  They were the keepers of the temple as long as they
lived.  When grown very old, as they stood one day before the
steps of the sacred edifice, and were telling the story of the
place, Baucis saw Philemon begin to put forth leaves, and old
Philemon saw Baucis changing in like manner.  And now a leafy
crown had grown over their heads, while exchanging parting words,
as long as they could speak.  "Farewell, dear spouse," they said,
together, and at the same moment the bark closed over their
mouths.  The Tyanean shepherd long showed the two trees, standing
side by side, made out of the two good old people.

The story of Baucis and Philemon has been imitated by Swift, in a
burlesque style, the actors in the change being two wandering
saints and the house being changed into a church, of which
Philemon is made the parson The following may serve as a
specimen:--

"They scarce had spoke when, fair and soft,
The roof began to mount aloft;
Aloft rose every beam and rafter;
The heavy wall climbed slowly after.
The chimney widened and grew higher,
Became a steeple with a spire.
The kettle to the top was hoist,
And there stood fastened to a joist,
But with the upside down, to show
Its inclination for below;
In vain, for a superior force,
Applied at bottom, stops its course;
Doomed ever in suspense to dwell,
'Tis now no kettle, but a bell.
A wooden jack, which had almost
Lost by disuse the art to roast,
A sudden alteration feels,
Increased by new intestine wheels;
And, what exalts the wonder more,
The number made the motion slower;
The flier, though 't had leaden feet,
Turned round so quick you scarce could see 't:
But slackened by some secret power,
Now hardly moves an inch an hour.
The jack and chimney, near allied,
Had never left each other's side.
The chimney to a steeple grown,
The jack would not be left alone;
But up against the steeple reared,
Became a clock, and still adhered;
And still its love to household cares
By a shrill voice at noon declares.
Warning the cook-maid not to burn
That roast meat which it cannot turn.
The groaning chair began to crawl,
Like a huge snail, along the wall;
There stuck aloft in public view,
And, with small change, a pulpit grew.
A bedstead of the antique mode,
Compact of timber many a load,
Such as our ancestors did use,
Was metamorphosed into pews,
Which still their ancient nature keep
By lodging folks disposed to sleep."

PROSERPINE

Under the island of Aetna lies Typhoeus the Titan, in punishment
for his share in the rebellion of the giants against Jupiter.
Two mountains press down   the one his right and the other his
left hand   while Aetna lies over his head.  As Typhoeus moves,
the earth shakes; as he breathes, smoke and ashes come up from
Aetna.  Pluto is terrified at the rocking of the earth, and fears
that his kingdom will be laid open to the light of day.  He
mounts his chariot with the four black horses and comes up to
earth and looks around.  While he is thus engaged, Venus, sitting
on Mount Eryx playing with her boy Cupid, sees him and says: "My
son, take your darts with which you conquer all, even Jove
himself, and send one into the breast of yonder dark monarch, who
rules the realm of Tartarus.  Why should he alone escape?  Seize
the opportunity to extend your empire and mine.  Do you not see
that even in heaven some despise our power?  Minerva the wise,
and Diana the huntress, defy us; and there is that daughter of
Ceres, who threatens to follow their example.  Now do you, if you
have any regard for your own interest or mine, join these two in
one."  The boy unbound his quiver, and selected his sharpest and
truest arrow; then, straining the bow against his knee, he
attached the string, and, having made ready, shot the arrow with
its barbed point right into the heart of Pluto.

In the vale of Enna there is a lake embowered in woods, which
screen it from the fervid rays of the sun, while the moist ground
is covered with flowers, and spring reigns perpetual.  Here
Proserpine was playing with her companions, gathering lilies and
violets, and filling her basket and her apron with them, when
Pluto saw her from his chariot, loved her, and carried her off.
She screamed for help to her mother and her companions; and when
in her fright she dropped the corners of her apron and let the
flowers fall, childlike, she felt the loss of them as an addition
to her grief.  The ravisher urged on his steeds, calling them
each by name, and throwing loose over their heads and necks his
iron-colored reins.  When he reached the River Cyane, and it
opposed his passage, he struck the river bank with his trident,
and the earth opened and gave him a passage to Tartarus.

Ceres sought her daughter all the world over.  Bright-haired
Aurora, when she came forth in the morning, and Hesperus, when he
led out the stars in the evening, found her still busy in the
search.  But it was all unavailing.  At length, weary and sad,
she sat down upon a stone and continued sitting nine days and
nights, in the open air, under the sunlight and moonlight and
falling showers.  It was where now stands the city of Eleusis,
then the home of an old man named Celeus.  He was out in the
field, gathering acorns and blackberries, and sticks for his
fire.  His little girl was driving home their two goats, and as
she passed the goddess, who appeared in the guise of an old
woman, she said to her, "Mother," and the name was sweet to the
ears of Ceres, "why do you sit here alone upon the rocks?"  The
old man also stopped, though his load was heavy, and begged her
to come into his cottage, such as it was.  She declined, and he
urged her.  "Go in peace," she replied, "and be happy in your
daughter; I have lost mine."  As she spoke, tears   or something
like tears, for the gods never weep   fell down her cheeks upon
her bosom.  The compassionate old man and his child wept with
her.  Then said he, "Come with us, and despise not our humble
roof; so may your daughter be restored to you in safety."  "Lead
on," said she, "I cannot resist that appeal!"  So she rose from
the stone and went with them.  As they walked he told her that
his only son, a little boy, lay very sick, feverish and
sleepless.  She stooped and gathered some poppies.  As they
entered the cottage they found all in great distress, for the boy
seemed past hope of recovery.  Metanira, his mother, received her
kindly, and the goddess stooped and kissed the lips of the sick
child.  Instantly the paleness left his face, and healthy vigor
returned to his body.  The whole family were delighted   that is,
the father, mother, and little girl, for they were all; they had
no servants. They spread the table, and put upon it curds and
cream, apples, and honey in the comb.  While they ate, Ceres
mingled poppy juice in the milk of the boy.  When night came and
all was still, she arose, and taking the sleeping boy, moulded
his limbs with her hands, and uttered over him three times a
solemn charm, then went and laid him in the ashes.  His mother,
who had been watching what her guest was doing, sprang forward
with a cry and snatched the child from the fire.  Then Ceres
assumed her own form, and a divine splendor shone all around.
While they were overcome with astonishment, she said, "Mother,
you have been cruel in your fondness to your son.  I would have
made him immortal, but you have frustrated my attempt.
Nevertheless, he shall be great and useful.  He shall teach men
the use of the plough, and the rewards which labor can win from
the cultivated soil."  So saying, she wrapped a cloud about her,
and mounting her chariot rode away.

Ceres continued her search for her daughter, passing from land to
land, and across seas and rivers, till at length she returned to
Sicily, whence she at first set out, and stood by the banks of
the River Cyane, where Pluto made himself a passage with his
prize to his own dominions.

The river-nymph would have told the goddess all she had
witnessed, but dared not, for fear of Pluto; so she only ventured
to take up the girdle which Proserpine had dropped in her flight,
and waft it to the feet of the mother.  Ceres, seeing this, was
no longer in doubt of her loss, but she did not yet know the
cause, and laid the blame on the innocent land.  "Ungrateful
soil," said she, "which I have endowed with fertility and clothed
with herbage and nourishing grain, No more shall you enjoy my
favors" Then the cattle died, the plough broke in the furrow, the
seed failed to come up; there was too much sun, there was too
much rain; the birds stole the seeds,   thistles and brambles
were the only growth.  Seeing this, the fountain Arethusa
interceded for the land.  "Goddess," said she, "blame not the
land; it opened unwillingly to yield a passage to your daughter.
I can tell you of her fate, for I have seen her.  This is not my
native country; I came hither from Elis.  I was a woodland nymph,
and delighted in the chase.  They praised my beauty, but I cared
nothing for it, and rather boasted of my hunting exploits.  One
day I was returning from the wood, heated with exercise, when I
came to a stream silently flowing, so clear that you might count
the pebbles on the bottom.  The willows shaded it, and the grassy
bank sloped down to the water's edge.  I approached, I touched
the water with my foot.  I stepped in knee-deep, and not content
with that, I laid my garments on the willows and went in.  While
I sported in the water, I heard an indistinct murmur coming up as
out of the depths of the stream; and made haste to escape to the
nearest bank.  The voice said, 'Why do you fly, Arethusa?  I am
Alpheus, the god of this stream.'  I ran, he pursued; he was not
more swift than I, but he was stronger, and gained upon me, as my
strength failed.  At last, exhausted, I cried for help to Diana.
'Help me, goddess!  Help your votary!'  The goddess heard, and
wrapped me suddenly in a thick cloud.  The river-god looked now
this way and now that, and twice came close to me, but could not
find me.  'Arethusa!  Arethusa!' he cried.  Oh, how I trembled,
like a lamb that hears the wolf growling outside the fold.  A
cold sweat came over me, my hair flowed down in streams; where my
foot stood there was a pool.  In short, in less time than it
takes to tell it I became a fountain.  But in this form Alpheus
knew me, and attempted to mingle his stream with mine.  Diana
cleft the ground, and I, endeavoring to escape him, plunged into
the cavern, and through the bowels of the earth came out here in
Sicily.  While I passed through the lower parts of the earth, I
saw your Proserpine.  She was sad, but no longer showing alarm in
her countenance.  Her look was such as became a queen,   the
queen of Erebus; the powerful bride of the monarch of the realms
of the dead."

When Ceres heard this, she stood for a while like one stupefied;
then turned her chariot towards heaven, and hastened to present
herself before the throne of Jove.  She told the story of her
bereavement, and implored Jupiter to interfere to procure the
restitution of her daughter.  Jupiter consented on one condition,
namely, that Proserpine should not during her stay in the lower
world have taken any food; otherwise, the Fates forbade her
release.  Accordingly, Mercury was sent, accompanied by Spring,
to demand Proserpine of Pluto.  The wily monarch consented; but
alas! the maiden had taken a pomegranate which Pluto offered her,
and had sucked the sweet pulp from a few of the seeds.  This was
enough to prevent her complete release; but a compromise was
made, by which she was to pass half the time with her mother, and
the rest with her husband Pluto.

Ceres allowed herself to be pacified with this arrangement, and
restored the earth to her favor.  Now she remembered Celeus and
his family, and her promise to his infant son Triptolemus.  When
the boy grew up, she taught him the use of the plough, and how to
sow the seed.  She took him in her chariot, drawn by winged
dragons, through all the countries of the earth, imparting to
mankind valuable grains, and the knowledge of agriculture.  After
his return, Triptolemus build a magnificent temple to Ceres in
Eleusis, and established the worship of the goddess, under the
name of the Eleusinian mysteries, which, in the splendor and
solemnity of their observance, surpassed all other religious
celebrations among the Greeks.

There can be little doubt but that this story of Ceres and
Proserpine is an allegory.  Proserpine signifies the seed-corn,
which, when cast into the ground, lies there concealed,   that
is, she is carried off by the god of the underworld; it
reappears,   that is, Proserpine is restored to her mother.
Spring leads her back to the light of day.

Milton alludes to the story of Proserpine in Paradise lost, Book
IV.:

"Not that fair field
Of Enna where Proserpine gathering flowers,
Herself a fairer flower, by gloomy Dis (a name for Pluto)
Was gathered, which cost Ceres all that pain
To seek her through the world,
. . . . might with this Paradise
Of Eden strive."

Hood, in his Ode to Melancholy, uses the same allusion very
beautifully:

"Forgive, if somewhile I forget,
In woe to come the present bliss;
As frightened Proserpine let fall
Her flowers at the sight of Dis."

The River Alpheus does in fact disappear under ground, in part of
its course, finding its way through subterranean channels, till
it again appears on the surface.  It was said that the Sicilian
fountain Arethusa was the same stream, which, after passing under
the sea, came up again in Sicily.  Hence the story ran that a cup
thrown into the Alpheus appeared again in Arethusa.  It is this
fable of the underground course of Alpheus that Coleridge alludes
to in his poem of Kubla Khan:

"In Xanadu did Kubla Khan
A stately pleasure-dome decree,
Where Alph, the sacred river, ran
Through caverns measureless to man,
Down to a sunless sea."

In one of Moore's juvenile poems he alludes to the same story,
and to the practice of throwing garlands, or other light objects
on the stream to be carried downward by it, and afterwards thrown
out when the river comes again to light.

"Oh, my beloved, how divinely sweet
Is the pure joy when kindred spirits meet!
Like him the river-god, whose waters flow,
With love their only light, through caves below,
Wafting in triumph all the flowery braids
And festal rings, with which Olympic maids
Have decked his current, as an offering meet
To lay at Arethusa's shining feet.
Think, when he meets at last his fountain bride,
What perfect love must thrill the blended tide!
Each lost in each, till mingling into one,
Their lot the same for shadow or for sun,
A type of true love, to the deep they run."

The following extract from Moore's Rhymes on the Road gives an
account of a celebrated picture by Albano at Milan, called a
Dance of Loves:

"'Tis for the theft of Enna's flower from earth
These urchins celebrate their dance of mirth,
Round the green tree, like fays upon a heath,
Those that are nearest linked in order bright,
Cheek after cheek, like rosebuds in a wreath;
And those more distant showing from beneath
The others' wings their little eyes of light.
While see! Among the clouds, their eldest brother,
But just flown up, tells with a smile of bliss,
This prank of Pluto to his charmed mother,
Who turns to greet the tidings with a kiss."

GLAUCUS AND SCYLLA

Glaucus was a fisherman.  One day he had drawn his nets to land,
and had taken a great many fishes of various kinds.  So he
emptied his net, and proceeded to sort the fishes on the grass.
The place where he stood was a beautiful island in the river, a
solitary spot, uninhabited, and not used for pasturage of cattle,
nor ever visited by any but himself.  On a sudden, the fishes,
which had been laid on the grass, began to revive and move their
fins as if they were in the water; and while he looked on
astonished, they one and all moved off to the water, plunged in
and swam away.  He did not know what to make of this, whether
some god had done it, or some secret power in the herbage.  "What
herb has such a power?" he exclaimed; and gathering some, he
tasted it.  Scarce had the juices of the plant reached his palate
when he found himself agitated with a longing desire for the
water.  He could no longer restrain himself, but bidding farewell
to earth, he plunged into the stream.  The gods of the water
received him graciously, and admitted him to the honor of their
society.  They obtained the consent of Oceanus and Tethys, the
sovereigns of the sea, that all that was mortal in him should be
washed away.  A hundred rivers poured their waters over him .
Then he lost all sense of his former nature and all
consciousness.  When he recovered, he found himself changed in
form and mind.  His hair was sea-green, and trailed behind him on
the water; his shoulders grew broad, and what had been thighs and
legs assumed the form of a fish's tail.  The sea-gods
complimented him on the change of his appearance, and he himself
was pleased with his looks.

One day Glaucus saw the beautiful maiden Scylla, the favorite of
the water-nymphs, rambling on the shore, and when she had found a
sheltered nook, laving her limbs in the clear water.  He fell in
love with her, and showing himself on the surface, spoke to her,
saying such things as he thought most likely to win her to stay;
for she turned to run immediately on sight of him and ran till
she had gained a cliff overlooking the sea.  Here she stopped and
turned round to see whether it was a god or a sea-animal, and
observed with wonder his shape and color.  Glaucus, partly
emerging from the water, and supporting himself against a rock,
said, "Maiden, I am no monster, nor a sea-animal, but a god; and
neither Proteus nor Triton ranks higher than I.  Once I was a
mortal, and followed the sea for a living; but now I belong
wholly to it."  Then he told the story of his metamorphosis and
how he had been promoted to his present dignity, and added, "But
what avails all this if it fails to move your heart?"  He was
going on in this strain, but Scylla turned and hastened away.

Glaucus was in despair, but it occurred to him to consult the
enchantress, Circe.  Accordingly he repaired to her island,   the
same where afterwards Ulysses landed, as we shall see in another
story.  After mutual salutations, he said, "Goddess, I entreat
your pity; you alone can relieve the pain I suffer.  The power of
herbs I know as well as any one, for it is to them I owe my
change of form I love Scylla.  I am ashamed to tell you how I
have sued and promised to her, and how scornfully she has treated
me.  I beseech you to use your incantations, or potent herbs, if
they are more prevailing, not to cure me of my love,   for that I
do not wish,   but to make her share it and yield me a like
return."  To which Circe replied, for she was not insensible to
the attractions of the sea-green deity, "You had better pursue a
willing object; you are worthy to be sought, instead of having to
seek in vain.  Be not diffident, know your own worth.  I protest
to you that even I, goddess though I be, and learned in the
virtues of plants and spells, should not know how to refuse you
If she scorns you, scorn her; meet one who is ready to meet you
half way, and thus make a due return to both at once."  To these
words Glaucus replied, "Sooner shall trees grow at the bottom of
the ocean, and seaweed on the top of the mountains, than I will
cease to love Scylla, and her alone."

The goddess was indignant, but she could not punish him, neither
did she wish to do so, for she liked him too well; so she turned
all her wrath against her rival, poor Scylla.  She took plants of
poisonous powers and mixed them together, with incantations and
charms.  Then she passed through the crowd of gambolling beasts,
the victims of her art, and proceeded to the coast of Sicily,
where Scylla lived.  There was a little bay on the shore to which
Scylla used to resort, in the heat of the day, to breathe the air
of the sea, and to bathe in its waters.  Here the goddess poured
her poisonous mixture, and muttered over it incantations of
mighty power.  Scylla came as usual and plunged into the water up
to her waist.  What was her horror to perceive a brood of
serpents and barking monsters surrounding her!  At first she
could not imagine they were a part of herself, and tried to run
from them, and to drive them away; but as she ran she carried
them with her, and when she tried to touch her limbs, she found
her hands touch only the yawning jaws of monsters.  Scylla
remained rooted to the spot.  Her temper grew as ugly as her
form, and she took pleasure in devouring hapless mariners who
came within her grasp.  Thus she destroyed six of the companions
of Ulysses, and tried to wreck the ships of Aeneas, till at last
she was turned into a rock, and as such still continues to be a
terror to mariners.

The following is Glaucus's account of his feelings after his
"sea-change:"

"I plunged for life or death.  To interknit
One's senses with so dense a breathing stuff
Might seem a work of pain; so not enough
Can I admire how crystal-smooth it felt,
And buoyant round my limbs.  At first I dwelt
Whole days and days in sheer astonishment;
Forgetful utterly of self-9ntent,
Moving but with the mighty ebb and flow.
Then like a new-fledged bird that first doth show
His spreaded feathers to the morrow chill,
I tried in fear the pinions of my well.
"Twas freedom!  And at once I visited
The ceaseless wonders of this ocean-bed."
Keats.


Chapter V
Pygmalion.   Dryope.   Venus and Adonis.   Apollo and Hyacinthus.
  Ceyx and Halcyone.

Pygmalion saw so much to blame in women that he came at last to
abhor the sex, and resolved to live unmarried.  He was a
sculptor, and had made with wonderful skill a statue of ivory, so
beautiful that no living woman could be compared to it in beauty.
It was indeed the perfect semblance of a maiden that seemed to be
alive, and only prevented from moving by modesty.  His art was so
perfect that it concealed itself, and its product looked like the
workmanship of nature.  Pygmalion admired his own work, and at
last fell in love with the counterfeit creation.  Oftentimes he
laid his hand upon it, as if to assure himself whether it were
living or not, and could not even then believe that it was only
ivory.  He caressed it, and gave it presents such as young girls
love,   bright shells and polished stones, little birds and
flowers of various hues, beads and amber.  He put raiment on its
limbs, and jewels on its fingers, and a necklace about its neck.
To the ears he hung earrings and strings of pearls upon the
breast.  Her dress became her, and she looked not less charming
than when unattired.  He laid her on a couch spread with cloths
of Tyrian dye, and called her his wife, and put her head upon a
pillow of the softest feathers, as if she could enjoy their
softness.

The festival of Venus was at hand,   a festival celebrated with
great pomp at Cyprus.  Victims were offered, the altars smoked,
and the odor of incense filled the air.  When Pygmalion had
performed his part in the solemnities, he stood before the altar
and timidly said, "Ye gods, who can do all things, give me, I
pray you, for my wife"   he dared not say "my ivory virgin," but
said instead   "one like my ivory virgin."  Venus, who was
present at the festival, heard him and knew the thought he would
have uttered; and, as an omen of her favor, caused the flame on
the altar to shoot up thrice in a fiery point into the air.  When
he returned home, he went to see his statue, and, leaning over
the couch, gave a kiss to the mouth.  It seemed to be warm.  He
pressed its lips again, he laid his hand upon the limbs; the
ivory felt soft to his touch, and yielded to his fingers like the
wax of Hymettus.  While he stands astonished and glad, though
doubting, and fears he may be mistaken, again and again with a
lover's ardor he touches the object of his hopes.  It was indeed
alive!  The veins when pressed yielded to the finger and then
resumed their roundness.  Then at last the votary of Venus found
words to thank the goddess, and pressed his lips upon lips as
real as his own.  The virgin felt the kisses and blushed, and,
opening her timid eyes to the light, fixed them at the same
moment on her lover.  Venus blessed the nuptials she had formed,
and from this union Paphos was born, from whom the city, sacred
to Venus, received its name.

Schiller, in his poem, the Ideals, applies this tale of Pygmalion
to the love of nature in a youthful heart.  In Schiller's
version, as in William Morris's, the statue is of marble.

"As once with prayers in passion flowing,
Pygmalion embraced the stone,
Till from the frozen marble glowing,
The light of feeling o'er him shone,
So did I clasp with young devotion
Bright Nature to a poet's heart;
Till breath and warmth and vital motion
Seemed through the statue form to dart.

"And then in all my ardor sharing,
The silent form expression found;
Returned my kiss of youthful daring,
And understood my heart's quick sound.
Then lived for me the bright creation.
The silver rill with song was rife;
The trees, the roses shared sensation,
An echo of my boundless life."
Rev. A. G. Bulfinch (brother of the author).

Morris tells the story of Pygmalion and the Image in some of the
most beautiful verses of the Earthly Paradise.

This is Galatea's description of her metamorphosis:

"'My sweet,' she said, 'as yet I am not wise,
Or stored with words aright the tale to tell,
But listen: when I opened first mine eyes
I stood within the niche thou knowest well,
And from my hand a heavy thing there fell
Carved like these flowers, nor could I see things clear,
But with a strange confused noise could hear.

"'At last mine eyes could see a woman fair,
But awful as this round white moon o'erhead,
So that I trembled when I saw her there,
For with my life was born some touch of dread,
And therewithal I heard her voice that said,
"Come down and learn to love and be alive,
For thee, a well-prized gift, today I give."'"

DRYOPE

Dryope and Iole were sisters.  The former was the wife of
Andraemon, beloved by her husband, and happy in the birth of her
first child.  One day the sisters strolled to the bank of a
stream that sloped gradually down to the water's edge, while the
upland was overgrown with myrtles.  They were intending to gather
flowers for forming garlands for the altars of the nymphs, and
Dryope carried her child at her bosom, a precious burden, and
nursed him as she walked.  Near the water grew a lotus plant,
full of purple flowers.  Dryope gathered some and offered them to
the baby, and Iole was about to do the same, when she perceived
blood dropping from the places where her sister had broken them
off the stem.  The plant was no other than the Nymph Lotis, who,
running from a base pursuer, had been changed into this form.
This they learned from the country people when it was too late.

Dryope, horror-struck when she perceived what she had done, would
gladly have hastened from the spot, but found her feet rooted to
the ground.  She tried to pull them away, but moved nothing but
her arms.  The woodiness crept upward, and by degrees invested
her body.  In anguish she attempted to tear her hair, but found
her hands filled with leaves.  The infant felt his mother's bosom
begin to harden, and the milk cease to flow.  Iole looked on at
the sad fate of her sister, and could render no assistance.  She
embraced the growing trunk, as if she would hold back the
advancing wood, and would gladly have been enveloped in the same
bark.  At this moment Andraemon, the husband of Dryope, with her
father, approached; and when they asked for Dryope, Iole pointed
them to the new-formed lotus.  They embraced the trunk of the yet
warm tree, and showered their kisses on its leaves.

Now there was nothing left of Dryope but her face.  Her tears
still flowed and fell on her leaves, and while she could she
spoke.  "I am not guilty.  I deserve not this fate.  I have
injured no one.  If I speak falsely, may my foliage perish with
drought and my trunk be cut down and burned.  Take this infant
and give him to a nurse.  Let him often be brought and nursed
under my branches, and play in my shade; and when he is old
enough to talk, let him be taught to call me mother, and to say
with sadness, 'My mother lies hid under this bark' But bid him be
careful of river banks, and beware how he plucks flowers,
remembering that every bush he sees may be a goddess in disguise.
Farewell, dear husband, and sister, and father.  If you retain
any love for me, let not the axe wound me, nor the flocks bite
and tear my branches.  Since I cannot stoop to you, climb up
hither and kiss me; and while my lips continue to feel, lift up
my child that I may kiss him.  I can speak no more, for already
the bark advances up my neck, and will soon shoot over me.  You
need not close my eyes; the bark will close them without your
aid."  Then the lips ceased to move, and life was extinct; but
the branches retained, for some time longer the vital heat.

Keats, in Endymion, alludes to Dryope thus:

"She took a lute from which there pulsing came
A lively prelude, fashioning the way
In which her voice should wander.  'Twas a lay
More subtle-cadenced, more forest-wild
Than Dryope's lone lulling of her child."

VENUS AND ADONIS

Venus, playing one day with her boy Cupid, wounded her bosom with
one of his arrows.  She pushed him away, but the wound was deeper
than she thought.  Before it healed she beheld Adonis, and was
captivated with him.  She no longer took any interest in her
favorite resorts,   Paphos, and Cnidos, and Amathos, rich in
metals.  She absented herself even from Olympus, for Adonis was
dearer to her than heaven.  Him she followed and bore him
company.  She who used to love to recline in the shade, with no
care but to cultivate her charms, now rambled through the woods
and over the hills, dressed like the huntress Diana.  She called
her dogs, and chased hares and stags, or other game that it is
safe to hunt, but kept clear of the wolves and bears, reeking
with the slaughter of the herd.  She charged Adonis, too, to
beware of such dangerous animals.  "Be brave towards the timid,"
said she; "courage against the courageous is not safe.  Beware
how you expose yourself to danger, and put my happiness to risk.
Attack not the beasts that Nature has armed with weapons.  I do
not value your glory so highly as to consent to purchase it by
such exposure.  Your youth, and the beauty that charms Venus,
will not touch the hearts of lions and bristly boars.  Think of
their terrible claws and prodigious strength!  I hate the whole
race of them.  Do you ask why?"  Then she told him the story of
Atalanta and Hippomenes, who were changed into lions for their
ingratitude to her.

Having given him this warning, she mounted her chariot drawn by
swans, and drove away through the air.  But Adonis was too noble
to heed such counsels.  The dogs had roused a wild boar from his
lair, and the youth threw his spear and wounded the animal with a
sidelong stroke.  The beast drew out the weapon with his jaws,
and rushed after Adonis, who turned and ran; but the boar
overtook him, and buried his tusks in his side, and stretched him
dying upon the plain.

Venus, in her swan-drawn chariot, had not yet reached Cyprus,
when she heard coming up through mid air the groans of her
beloved, and turned her white-winged coursers back to earth.  As
she drew near and saw from on high his lifeless body bathed in
blood, she alighted, and bending over it beat her breast and tore
her hair.  Reproaching the Fates, she said, "Yet theirs shall be
but a partial triumph; memorials of my grief shall endure, and
the spectacle of your death, my Adonis, and of my lamentation
shall be annually renewed.  Your blood shall be changed into a
flower; that consolation none can envy me."  Thus speaking, she
sprinkled nectar on the blood; and as they mingled, bubbles rose
as in a pool on which raindrops fall, and in an hour's time there
sprang up a flower of bloody hue like that of a pomegranate.  But
it is short-lived.  It is said the wind blows the blossoms open,
and afterwards blows the petals away; so it is called Anemone, or
wind Flower, from the cause which assists equally in its
production and its decay.

Milton alludes to the story of Venus and Adonis in his Comus:

"Beds of hyacinth and roses
Where young Adonis oft reposes,
Waxing well of his deep wound
In slumber soft, and on the ground
Sadly sits th'Assyrian queen."

And Morris also in Atalanta's Race:

"There by his horn the Dryads well might know
His thrust against the bear's heart had been true,
And there Adonis bane his javelin slew"

APOLLO AND HYACINTHUS

Apollo was passionately fond of a youth named Hyacinthus.  He
accompanied him in his sports, carried the nets when he went
fishing, led the dogs when he went to hunt, followed him in his
excursions in the mountains, and neglected for him his lyre and
his arrows.  One day they played a game of quoits together, and
Apollo, heaving aloft the discus, with strength mingled with
skill, sent it high and far.  Hyacinthus watched it as it flew,
and excited with the sport ran forward to seize it, eager to make
his throw, when the quoit bounded from the earth and struck him
in the forehead.  He fainted and fell.  The god, as pale as
himself, raised him and tried all his art to stanch the wound and
retain the flitting life, but all in vain; the hurt was past the
power of medicine.  As, when one has broken the stem of a lily in
the garden, it hangs its head and turns its flowers to the earth,
so the head of the dying boy, as if too heavy for his neck, fell
over on his shoulder.  "Thou diest, Hyacinth," so spoke Phoebus,
"robbed of thy youth by me.  Thine is the suffering, mine the
crime.  Would that I could die for thee!  But since that may not
be thou shalt live with me in memory and in song.  My lyre shall
celebrate thee, my song shall tell thy fate, and thou shalt
become a flower inscribed with my regrets."  While Apollo spoke,
behold the blood which had flowed on the ground and stained the
herbage, ceased to be blood; but a flower of hue more beautiful
than the Tyrian sprang up, resembling the lily, if it were not
that this is purple and that silvery white (it is evidently not
our modern hyacinth that is here described.  It is perhaps some
species of iris, or perhaps of larkspur, or of pansy.)  And this
was not enough for Phoebus; but to confer still grater honor, he
marked the petals with his sorrow, and inscribed "Ah!  Ah!" upon
them, as we see to this day.  The flower bears the name of
Hyacinthus, and with every returning spring revives the memory of
his fate.

It was said that Zephyrus (the West-wind), who was also fond of
Hyacinthus and jealous of his preference of Apollo, blew the
quoit out of its course to make it strike Hyacinthus.  Keats
alludes to this in his Endymion, where he describes the lookers-
on at the game of quoits:

"Or they might watch the quoit-pitchers, intent
On either side, pitying the sad death
Of Hyacinthus, when the cruel breath
Of Zephyr slew him; Zephyr penitent,
Who now ere Phoebus mounts the firmament,
Fondles the flower amid the sobbing rain."

An allusion to Hyacinthus will also be recognized in Milton's
Lycidas:

"Like to that sanguine flower inscribed with woe."

CEYX AND HALCYONE: OR, THE HALCYON BIRDS

Ceyx was King of Thessaly, where he reigned in peace without
violence or wrong.  He was son of Hesperus, the Day-star, and the
glow of his beauty reminded one of his father.  Halcyone, the
daughter of Aeolus, was his wife, and devotedly attached to him.
Now Ceyx was in deep affliction for the loss of his brother, and
direful prodigies following his brother's death made him feel as
if the gods were hostile to him.  He thought best therefore to
make a voyage to Claros in Ionia, to consult the oracle of
Apollo.  But as soon as he disclosed his intention to his wife
Halcyone, a shudder ran through her frame, and her face grew
deadly pale.  "What fault of mine, dearest husband, has turned
your affection from me?  Where is that love of me that used to be
uppermost in your thoughts?  Have you learned to feel easy in the
absence of Halcyone?  Would you rather have me away?"  She also
endeavored to discourage him, by describing the violence of the
winds, which she had known familiarly when she lived at home in
her father's house, Aeolus being the god of the winds, and having
as much as he could do to restrain them.  "They rush together,"
said she, "with such fury that fire flashes from the conflict.
But if you must go," she added, "dear husband, let me go with
you, Otherwise I shall suffer, not only the real evils which you
must encounter, but those also which my fears suggest."

These words weighed heavily on the mind of king Ceyx, and it was
no less his own wish than hers to take her with him, but he could
not bear to expose her to the dangers of the sea.  He answered,
therefore, consoling her as well as he could, and finished with
these words: "I promise, by the rays of my father the Day-star,
that if fate permits I will return before the moon shall have
twice rounded her orb."  When he had thus spoken he ordered the
vessel to be drawn out of the ship-house, and the oars and sails
to be put aboard.  When Halcyone saw these preparations she
shuddered, as if with a presentiment of evil.  With tears and
sobs she said farewell, and then fell senseless to the ground.

Ceyx would still have lingered, but now the young men grasped
their oars and pulled vigorously through the waves, with long and
measured strokes.  Halcyone raised her streaming eyes, and saw
her husband standing on the deck, waving his hand to her.  She
answered his signal till the vessel had receded so far that she
could no longer distinguish his form from the rest.  When the
vessel itself could no more be seen, she strained her eyes to
catch the last glimmer of the sail, till that too disappeared.
Then, retiring to her chamber, she threw herself on her solitary
couch.

Meanwhile they glide out of the harbor, and the breeze plays
among the ropes.  The seamen draw in their oars, and hoist their
sails.  When half or less of their course was passed, as night
drew on, the sea began to whiten with swelling waves, and the
east wind to blow a gale.  The master gives the word to take in
sail, but the storm forbids obedience, for such is the roar of
the winds and waves that his orders are unheard.  The men, of
their own accord, busy themselves to secure the oars, to
strengthen the ship, to reef the sail.  While they thus do what
to each one seems best, the storm increases.  The shouting of the
men, the rattling of the shrouds, and the dashing of the waves,
mingle with the roar of the thunder.  The swelling sea seems
lifted up to the heavens, to scatter its foam among the clouds;
then sinking away to the bottom assumes the color of the shoal,
a Stygian blackness.

The vessel obeys all these changes.  It seems like a wild beast
that rushes on the spears of the hunters.  Rain falls in
torrents, as if the skies were coming down to unite with the sea.
When the lightning ceases for a moment, the night seems to add
its own darkness to that of the storm; then comes the flash,
rending the darkness asunder, and lighting up all with a glare.
Skill fails, courage sinks, and death seems to come on every
wave.  The men are stupefied with terror.  The thought of
parents, and kindred, and pledges left at home, comes over their
minds.  Ceyx thinks of Halcyone.  No name but hers is on his
lips, and while he yearns for her, he yet rejoices in her
absence.  Presently the mast is shattered by a stroke of
lightning, the rudder broken, and the triumphant surge curling
over looks down upon the wreck, then falls, and crushes it to
fragments.  Some of the seamen, stunned by the stroke, sink, and
rise no more; others cling to fragments of the wreck.  Ceyx, with
the hand that used to grasp the sceptre, holds fast to a plank,
calling for help,   alas, in vain,   upon his father and his
father-in-law.  But oftenest on his lips was the name of
Halcyone.  His thoughts cling to her.  He prays that the waves
may bear his body to her sight, and that it may receive burial at
her hands.  At length the waters overwhelm him, and he sinks.
The Day-star looked dim that night.  Since it could not leave the
heavens, it shrouded its face with clouds.

In the mean while Halcyone, ignorant of all these horrors,
counted the days till her husband's promised return.  Now she
gets ready the garments which he shall put on, and now what she
shall wear when he arrives.  To all the gods she offers frequent
incense but more than all to Juno.  For her husband, who was no
more, she prayed incessantly; that he might be safe; that he
might come home; that he might not, in his absence, see any one
that he would love better than her.  But of all these prayers,
the last was the only one destined to be granted.  The goddess,
at length, could not bear any longer to be pleaded with for one
already dead, and to have hands raised to her altars, that ought
rather to be offering funeral rites.  So, calling Iris, she said,
"Iris, my faithful messenger, go to the drowsy dwelling of
Somnus, and tell him to send a vision to Halcyone, in the form of
Ceyx, to make known to her the event."

Iris puts on her robe of many colors, and tingeing the sky with
her bow, seeks the palace of the King of Sleep. Near the
Cimmerian country, a mountain cave is the abode of the dull god,
Somnus,  Here Phoebus dares not come, either rising, or at
midday, or setting.  Clouds and shadows are exhaled from the
ground, and the light glimmers faintly.  The bird of dawn, with
crested head, never calls aloud there to Aurora, nor watchful
dog, nor more sagacious goose disturbs the silence.  (This
comparison of the dog and the goose is a reference by Ovid to a
passage in Roman history.)  No wild beast, nor cattle, nor branch
moved with the wind, nor sound of human conversation, breaks the
stillness.  Silence reigns there; and from the bottom of the rock
the River Lethe flows, and by its murmur invites to sleep.
Poppies grow abundantly before the door of the cave, and other
herbs, from whose juices Night collects slumbers, which she
scatters over the darkened earth.  There is no gate to the
mansion, to creak on its hinges, nor any watchman; but in the
midst, a couch of black ebony, adorned with black plumes and
black curtains.  There the god reclines, his limbs relaxed with
sleep.  Around him lie dreams, resembling all various forms, as
many as the harvest bears stalks, or the forest leaves, or the
seashore grains of sand.

As soon as the goddess entered and brushed away the dreams that
hovered around her, her brightness lit up all the cave.  The god,
scarce opening his eyes, and ever and anon dropping his beard
upon his breast, at last shook himself free from himself, and
leaning on his arm, inquired her errand,   for he knew who she
was.  She answered, "Somnus, gentlest of the gods, tranquillizer
of minds and soother of careworn hearts, Juno sends you her
commands that you dispatch a dream to Halcyone, in the city of
Trachinae, representing her lost husband and all the events of
the wreck."

Having delivered her message, Iris hasted away, for she could not
longer endure the stagnant air, and as she felt drowsiness
creeping over her, she made her escape, and returned by her bow
the way she came.  Then Somnus called one of his numerous sons,
Morpheus,   the most expert at counterfeiting forms, and in
imitating the walk, the countenance, and mode of speaking, even
the clothes and attitudes most characteristic of each.  But he
only imitates men, leaving it to another to personate birds,
beasts, and serpents.  Him they call Icelos; and Phantasos is a
third, who turns himself into rocks, waters, woods, and other
things without life.  These wait upon kings and great personages
in their sleeping hours, while others move among the common
people.  Somnus chose, from all the brothers, Morpheus, to
perform the command of Iris; then laid his head on his pillow and
yielded himself to grateful repose.

Morpheus flew, making no noise with his wings, and soon came to
the Haemonian city, where, laying aside his wings, he assumed the
form of Ceyx.  Under that form, but pale like a dead man, naked,
he stood before the couch of the wretched wife.  His beard seemed
soaked with water, and water trickled from his drowned locks.
Leaning over the bed, tears streaming from his eyes, he said, "Do
you recognize your Ceyx, unhappy wife, or has death too much
changed my visage?  Behold me, know me, your husband's shade,
instead of himself.  Your prayers, Halcyone, availed me nothing.
I am dead.  No more deceive yourself with vain hopes of my
return.  The stormy winds sunk my ship in the Aegean Sea; waves
filled my mouth while it called aloud on you.  No uncertain
messenger tells you this, no vague rumor brings it to your ears.
I come in person, a shipwrecked man, to tell you my fate.  Arise!
Give me tears, give me lamentations, let me not go down to
Tartarus unwept."  To these words Morpheus added the voice which
seemed to be that of her husband; he seemed to pour forth genuine
tears; his hands had the gestures of Ceyx.

Halcyone, weeping, groaned, and stretched out her arms in her
sleep, striving to embrace his body, but grasping only the air.
"Stay!" she cried; "whither do you fly?  Let us go together."
Her own voice awakened her.  Starting up, she gazed eagerly
around, to see if he was still present, for the servants, alarmed
by her cries, had brought a light.  When she found him not, she
smote her breast and rent her garments.  She cares not to unbind
her hair, but tears it wildly.  Her nurse asks what is the cause
of her grief.  "Halcyone is no more," she answers; "she perished
with her Ceyx.  Utter not words of comfort, he is shipwrecked and
dead.  I have seen him.  I have recognized him.  I stretched out
my hands to seize him and detain him.  His shade vanished, but it
was the true shade of my husband.  Not with the accustomed
features, not with the beauty that was his, but pale, naked, and
with his hair wet with sea-water, he appeared to wretched me.
Here, in this very spot, the sad vision stood,"   and she looked
to find the mark of his footsteps.  "This it was, this that my
presaging mind foreboded, when I implored him not to leave me to
trust himself to the waves.  O, how I wish, since thou wouldst
go, that thou hadst taken me with thee!  It would have been far
better.  Then I should have had no remnant of life to spend
without thee, nor a separate death to die.  If I could bear to
live and struggle to endure, I should be more cruel to myself
than the sea has been to me.  But I will not struggle.  I will
not be separated from thee, unhappy husband.  This time, at least
I will keep thee company.  In death, if one tomb may not include
us, one epitaph shall; if I may not lay my ashes with thine, my
name, at least, shall not be separated."  Her grief forbade more
words, and these were broken with tears and sobs.

It was now morning.  She went to the sea-shore, and sought the
spot where she last saw him, on his departure.  "Here he lingered
and cast off his tacklings and gave me his last kiss."  While she
reviews every moment, and strives to recall every incident,
looking out over the sea, she descries an indistinct object
floating in the water.  At first she was in doubt what it was,
but by degrees the waves bore it nearer, and it was plainly the
body of a man.  Though unknowing of whom, yet, as it was of some
shipwrecked one, she was deeply moved, and gave it her tears,
saying, "Alas!  Unhappy one, and unhappy, if such there be, thy
wife!"  Borne by the waves, it came nearer.  As she more and more
nearly views it, she trembles more and more.  Now, now it
approaches the shore.  Now marks that she recognizes appear.  It
is her husband!  Stretching out her trembling hands towards it,
she exclaims, "O, dearest husband, is it thus you return to me?"

There was built out from the shore a mole, constructed to break
the assaults of the sea, and stem its violent ingress.  She
leaped upon this barrier and (it was wonderful she could do so)
she flew, and striking the air with wings produced on the
instant, skimmed along the surface of the water, an unhappy bird.
As she flew, her throat poured forth sounds full of grief, and
like the voice of one lamenting.  When she touched the mute and
bloodless body, she enfolded its beloved limbs with her new-
formed wings, and tried to give kisses with her horny beak.
Whether Ceyx felt it, or whether it was only the action of the
waves, those who looked on doubted, but the body seemed to raise
its head.  But indeed he did feel it, and by the pitying gods
both of them were changed into birds.  They mate and have their
young ones.  For seven placid days, in winter time, Halcyone
broods over her nest, which floats upon the sea.  Then the way is
safe to seamen.  Aeolus guards the winds, and keeps them from
disturbing the deep.  The sea is given up, for the time, to his
grandchildren.

The following lines from Byron's Bride of Abydos might seem
borrowed from the concluding part of this description, if it were
not stated that the author derived the suggestion from observing
the motion of a floating corpse.

"As shaken on his restless pillow,
His head heaves with the heaving billow;
That hand, whose motion is not life,
Yet feebly seems to menace strife,
Flung by the tossing tide on high,.
Then levelled with the wave  "

Milton, in his Hymn for the Nativity, thus alludes to the fable
of the Halcyon:

"But peaceful was the night
Wherein the Prince of light
His reign of peace upon the earth began;
The winds with wonder whist,
Smoothly the waters kist,
Whispering new joys to the mild ocean
Who now hath quite forgot to rave
While birds of calm sit brooding on the charmed wave."

Keats, also, in Endymion, says:

"O magic sleep!  O comfortable bird
That broodest o'er the troubled sea of the mind
Till it is hushed and smooth."


Chapter VI
Vertumnus and Pomona.   Cupid and Psyche

The Hamadryads were Wood-nymphs.  Among them was Pomona, and no
one excelled her in love of the garden and the culture of fruit.
She cared not for forests and rivers, but loved the cultivated
country and trees that bear delicious apples.  Her right hand
bore for its weapon not a javelin, but a pruning knife.  Armed
with this, she worked at one time, to repress the too luxuriant
growths, and curtail the branches that straggled out of place; at
another, to split the twig and insert therein a graft, making the
branch adopt a nursling not its own.  She took care, too, that
her favorites should not suffer from drought, and led streams of
water by them that the thirsty roots might drink.  This
occupation was her pursuit, her passion; and she was free from
that which Venus inspires.  She was not without fear of the
country people, and kept her orchard locked, and allowed not men
to enter.  The Fauns and Satyrs would have given all they
possessed to win her, and so would old Sylvanus, who looks young
for his years, and Pan, who wears a garland of pine leaves around
his head.  But Vertumnus loved her best of all; yet he sped no
better than the rest.  Oh, how often, in the disguise of a
reaper, did he bring her corn in a basket, and looked the very
image of a reaper!  With a hay-band tied round him, one would
think he had just come from turning over the grass.  Sometimes he
would have an ox-goad in his hand, and you would have said he had
just unyoked his weary oxen.  Now he bore a pruning-hook, and
personated a vine-dresser; and again with a ladder on his
shoulder, he seemed as if he was going to gather apples.
Sometimes he trudged along as a discharged soldier, and again he
bore a fishing-rod as if going to fish.  In this way, he gained
admission to her, again and again, and fed his passion with the
sight of her.

One day he came in the guise of an old woman, her gray hair
surmounted with a cap, and a staff in her hand.  She entered the
garden and admired the fruit.  "It does you credit, my dear," she
said, and kissed Pomona, not exactly with an old woman's kiss.
She sat down on a bank, and looked up at the branches laden with
fruit which hung over her.  Opposite was an elm entwined with a
vine loaded with swelling grapes.  She praised the tree and its
associated vine, equally.  "But," said Vertumnus, "if the tree
stood alone, and had no vine clinging to it, it would lie
prostrate on the ground.  Why will you not take a lesson from the
tree and the vine, and consent to unite yourself with some one?
I wish you would.  Helen herself had not more numerous suitors,
nor Penelope, the wife of shrewd Ulysses.  Even while you spurn
them, they court you  rural deities and others of every kind that
frequent these mountains.  But if you are prudent and want to
make a good alliance, and will let an old woman advise you,   who
loves you better than you have any idea of,   dismiss all the
rest and accept Vertumnus, on my recommendation.  I know him as
well as he knows himself.  He is not a wandering deity, but
belongs to these mountains.  Nor is he like too many of the
lovers nowadays, who love any one they happen to see; he loves
you, and you only.  Add to this, he is young and handsome, and
has the art of assuming any shape he pleases, and can make
himself just what you command him.  Moreover, he loves the same
things that you do, delights in gardening, and handles your
apples with admiration.  But NOW he cares nothing for fruits, nor
flowers, nor anything else, but only yourself.  Take pity on him,
and fancy him speaking now with my mouth.  Remember that the gods
punish cruelty, and that Venus hates a hard heart, and will visit
such offenses sooner or later.  To prove this, let me tell you a
story, which is well known in Cyprus to be a fact; and I hope it
will have the effect to make you more merciful.

"Iphis was a young man of humble parentage, who saw and loved
Anaxarete, a noble lady of the ancient family of Teucer.  He
struggled long with his passion, but when he found he could not
subdue it, he came a suppliant to her mansion.  First he told his
passion to her nurse, and begged her as she loved her foster-
child to favor his suit.  And then he tried to win her domestics
to his side.  Sometimes he committed his vows to written tablets,
and often hung at her door garlands which he had moistened with
his tears.  He stretched himself on her threshold, and uttered
his complaints to the cruel bolts and bars.  She was deafer than
the surges which rise in the November gale; harder than steel
from the German forges, or a rock that still clings to its native
cliff.  She mocked and laughed at him, adding cruel words to her
ungentle treatment, and gave not the slightest gleam of hope.

"Iphis could not any longer endure the torments of hopeless love,
and standing before her doors, he spake these last words:
'Anaxarete, you have conquered, and shall no longer have to bear
my importunities.  Enjoy your triumph!  Sing songs of joy, and
bind your forehead with laurel,   you have conquered!  I die;
stony heart, rejoice!  This at least I can do to gratify you, and
force you to praise me; and thus shall I prove that the love of
you left me but with life.  Nor will I leave it to rumor to tell
you of my death.  I will come myself, and you shall see me die,
and feast your eyes on the spectacle.  Yet, Oh, ye gods, who look
down on mortal woes, observe my fate!  I ask but this!  Let me be
remembered in coming ages, and add those years to my name which
you have reft from my life.'  Thus he said, and, turning his pale
face and weeping eyes towards her mansion, he fastened a rope to
the gate-post, on which he had hung garlands, and putting his
head into the noose, he murmured, 'This garland at least will
please you, cruel girl!'  And falling, hung suspended with his
neck broken.  As he fell he struck against the gate, and the
sound was as the sound of a groan.  The servants opened the door
and found him dead, and with exclamations of pity raised him and
carried him home to his mother, for his father was not living.
She received the dead body of her son, and folded the cold form
to her bosom; while she poured forth the sad words which bereaved
mothers utter.  The mournful funeral passed through the town, and
the pale corpse was borne on a bier to the place of the funeral
pile.  By chance the home of Anaxarete was on the street where
the procession passed, and the lamentations of the mourners met
the ears of her whom the avenging deity had already marked for
punishment.

"'Let us see this sad procession,' said she, and mounted to a
turret, whence through an open window she looked upon the
funeral.  Scarce had her eyes rested upon the form of Iphis
stretched on the bier, when they began to stiffen, and the warm
blood in her body to become cold.  Endeavoring to step back, she
found she could not move her feet; trying to turn away her face,
she tried in vain; and by degrees all her limbs became stony like
her heart.  That you may not doubt the fact, the statue still
remains, and stands in the temple of Venus at Salamis, in the
exact form of the lady.  Now think of these things, my dear, and
lay aside your scorn and your delays, and accept a lover.  So may
neither the vernal frosts blight your young fruits, nor furious
winds scatter your blossoms!"

When Vertumnus had spoken thus, he dropped the disguise of an old
woman, and stood before her in his proper person, as a comely
youth.  It appeared to her like the sun bursting through a cloud.
He would have renewed his entreaties, but there was no need; his
arguments and the sight of his true form prevailed, and the Nymph
no longer resisted, but owned a mutual flame.

Pomona was the especial patroness of the apple-orchard, and as
such she was invoked by Phillips, the author of a poem on Cider,
in blank verse, in the following lines:

"What soil the apple loves, what care is due
To orchats, timeliest when to press the fruits,
Thy gift, Pomona, in Miltonian verse
Adventurous I presume to sing."

Thomson, in the Seasons, alludes to Phillips:

"Phillips, Pomona's bard, the second thou
Who nobly durst, in rhyme-unfettered verse,
With British freedom, sing the British song."

It will be seen that Thomson refers to the poet's reference to
Milton, but it is not true that Phillips is only the second
writer of English blank verse.  Many other poets beside Milton
had used it long before Phillips' time.

But Pomona was also regarded as presiding over other fruits, and,
as such, is invoked by Thomson:

"Bear me, Pomona, to thy citron groves,
To where the lemon and the piercing lime,
With the deep orange, glowing through the green,
Their lighter glories blend.  Lay me reclined
Beneath the spreading tamarind, that shakes,
Fanned by the breeze, its fever-cooling fruit."


CUPID AND PSYCHE

A certain king had three daughters.  (This seems to be one of the
latest fables of the Greek mythology.  It has not been found
earlier than the close of the second century of the Christian
era.  It bears marks of the higher religious notions of that
time.)  The two elder were charming girls, but the beauty of the
youngest was so wonderful that language is too poor to express
its due praise.  The fame of her beauty was so great that
strangers from neighboring countries came in crowds to enjoy the
sight, and looked on her with amazement, paying her that homage
which is due only to Venus herself.  In fact, Venus found her
altars deserted, while men turned their devotion to this young
virgin.  As she passed along, the people sang her praises, and
strewed her way with chaplets and flowers.

This perversion to a mortal of the homage due only to the
immortal powers gave great offence to the real Venus.  Shaking
her ambrosial locks with indignation, she exclaimed, "Am I then
to be eclipsed in my honors by a mortal girl?  In vain then did
that royal shepherd, whose judgment was approved by Jove himself,
give me the palm of beauty over my illustrious rivals, Pallas and
June.  But she shall not so quietly usurp my honors.  I will give
her cause to repent of so unlawful a beauty."

Thereupon she calls her winged son Cupid, mischievous enough in
his own nature, and rouses and provokes him yet more by her
complaints.  She points out Psyche to him, and says, "My dear
son, punish that contumacious beauty; give thy mother a revenge
as sweet as her injuries are great; infuse into the bosom of that
haughty girl a passion for some low, mean, unworthy being, so
that she may reap a mortification as great as her present
exultation and triumph."

Cupid prepared to obey the commands of his mother.  There are two
fountains in Venus's garden, one of sweet waters, the other of
bitter.  Cupid filled two amber vases, one from each fountain,
and suspending them from the top of his quiver, hastened to the
chamber of Psyche, whom he found asleep.  He shed a few drops
from the bitter fountain over her lips, though the sight of her
almost moved him to pity; then touched her side with the point of
his arrow.  At the touch she awoke, and opened eyes upon Cupid
(himself invisible) which so startled him that in his confusion
he wounded himself with his own arrow.  Heedless of his wound his
whole thought now was to repair the mischief he had done, and he
poured the balmy drops of joy over all her silken ringlets.

Psyche, henceforth frowned upon by Venus, derived no benefit from
all her charms.  True, all eyes were cast eagerly upon her, and
every mouth spoke her praises; but neither king, royal youth, nor
plebeian presented himself to demand her in marriage.  Her two
elder sisters of moderate charms had now long been married to two
royal princes; but Psyche, in her lonely apartment, deplored her
solitude, sick of that beauty, which, while it procured abundance
of flattery, had failed to awaken love.

Her parents, afraid that they had unwittingly incurred the anger
of the gods, consulted the oracle of Apollo, and received this
answer: "The virgin is destined for the bride of no mortal lover.
Her future husband awaits her on the top of the mountain.  He is
a monster whom neither gods nor men can resist."

This dreadful decree of the oracle filled all the people with
dismay, and her parents abandoned themselves to grief.  But
Psyche said, "Why, my dear parents, do you now lament me?  You
should rather have grieved when the people showered upon me
undeserved honors, and with one voice called me a Venus.  I now
perceive that I am a victim to that name.  I submit.  Lead me to
that rock to which my unhappy fate has destined me." Accordingly,
all things being prepared, the royal maid took her place in the
procession, which more resembled a funeral than a nuptial pomp,
and with her parents, amid the lamentations of the people,
ascended the mountain, on the summit of which they left her
alone, and with sorrowful hearts returned home.

While Psyche stood on the ridge of the mountain, panting with
fear and with eyes full of tears, the gentle Zephyr raised her
from the earth and bore her with an easy motion into a flowery
dale.  By degrees her mind became composed, and she laid herself
down on the grassy bank to sleep.  When she awoke, refreshed with
sleep, she looked round and beheld nearby a pleasant grove of
tall and stately trees.  She entered it, and in the midst
discovered a fountain, sending forth clear and crystal waters,
and hard by, a magnificent palace whose August front impressed
the spectator that it was not the work of mortal hands, but the
happy retreat of some god.  Drawn by admiration and wonder, she
approached the building and ventured to enter.  Every object she
met filled her with pleasure and amazement.  Golden pillars
supported the vaulted roof, and the walls were enriched with
carvings and paintings representing beasts of the chase and rural
scenes, adapted to delight the eye of the beholder.  Proceeding
onward she perceived that besides the apartments of state there
were others, filled with all manner of treasures, and beautiful
and precious productions of nature and art.

While her eyes were thus occupied, a voice addressed her, though
she saw no one, uttering these words: "Sovereign lady, all that
you see is yours.  We whose voices you hear are your servants,
and shall obey all your commands with our utmost care and
diligence.  Retire therefore to your chamber and repose on your
bed of down, and when you see fit repair to the bath.  Supper
will await you in the adjoining alcove when it pleases you to
take your seat there."

Psyche gave ear to the admonitions of her vocal attendants, and
after repose and the refreshment of the bath, seated herself in
the alcove, where a table immediately presented itself, without
any visible aid from waiters or servants, and covered with the
greatest delicacies of food and the most nectareous wines.  Her
ears too were feasted with music from invisible performers; of
whom one sang, another played on the lute, and all closed in the
wonderful harmony of a full chorus.

She had not yet seen her destined husband.  He came only in the
hours of darkness, and fled before the dawn of morning, but his
accents were full of love, and inspired a like passion in her.
She often begged him to stay and let her behold him, but he would
not consent.  On the contrary, he charged her to make no attempt
to see him, for it was his pleasure, for the best of reasons, to
keep concealed.  "Why should you wish to behold me?" he said.
"Have you any doubt of my love?  Have you any wish ungratified?
If you saw me, perhaps you would fear me, perhaps adore me, but
all I ask of you is to love me.  I would rather you would love me
as an equal than adore me as a god."

This reasoning somewhat quieted Psyche for a time, and while the
novelty lasted she felt quite happy.  But at length the thought
of her parents, left in ignorance of her fate, and of her
sisters, precluded from sharing with her the delights of her
situation, preyed on her mind and made her begin to feel her
palace as but a splendid prison.  When her husband came one
night, she told him her distress, and at last drew from him an
unwilling consent that her sisters should be brought to see her.

So calling Zephyr, she acquainted him with her husband's
commands, and he, promptly obedient, soon brought them across the
mountain down to their sister's valley.  They embraced her and
she returned their caresses.  "Come," said Psyche, "enter with me
my house and refresh yourselves with whatever your sister has to
offer."  Then taking their hands she led them into her golden
palace, and committed them to the care of her numerous train of
attendant voices, to refresh them in her baths and at her table,
and to show them all her treasures.  The view of these celestial
delights caused envy to enter their bosoms, at seeing their young
sister possessed of such state and splendor, so much exceeding
their own.

They asked her numberless questions, among others what sort of a
person her husband was.  Psyche replied that he was a beautiful
youth, who generally spent the daytime in hunting upon the
mountains.  The sisters, not satisfied with this reply, soon made
her confess that she had never seen him.  Then they proceeded to
fill her bosom with dark suspicions.  "Call to mind," they said,
"the Pythian oracle that declared you destined to marry a direful
and tremendous monster.  The inhabitants of this valley say that
your husband is a terrible and monstrous serpent, who nourishes
you for a while with dainties that he may by and by devour you.
Take our advice.  Provide yourself with a lamp and a sharp knife;
put them in concealment that your husband may not discover them,
and when he is sound asleep, slip out of bed bring forth your
lamp and see for yourself whether what they say is true or not.
If it is, hesitate not to cut off the monster's head, and thereby
recover your liberty."

Psyche resisted these persuasions as well as she could, but they
did not fail to have their effect on her mind, and when her
sisters were gone, their words and her own curiosity were too
strong for her to resist.  So she prepared her lamp and a sharp
knife, and hid them out of sight of her husband.  When he had
fallen into his first sleep, she silently rose and uncovering her
lamp beheld not a hideous monster, but the most beautiful and
charming of the gods, with his golden ringlets wandering over his
snowy neck and crimson cheek, with two dewy wings on his
shoulders, whiter than snow, and with shining feathers like the
tender blossoms of spring.  As she leaned the lamp over to have a
nearer view of his face a drop of burning oil fell on the
shoulder of the god, startled with which he opened his eyes and
fixed them full upon her; then, without saying one word, he
spread his white wings and flew out of the window.  Psyche, in
vain endeavoring to follow him, fell from the window to the
ground.  Cupid, beholding her as she lay in the dust, stopped his
flight for an instant and said, "O foolish Psyche, is it thus you
repay my love?  After having disobeyed my mother's commands and
made you my wife, will you think me a monster and cut off my
head?  But go; return to your sisters, whose advice you seem to
think preferable to mine.  I inflict no other punishment on you
than to leave you forever.  Love cannot dwell with suspicion."
So saying he fled away, leaving poor Psyche prostrate on the
ground, filling the place with mournful lamentations.

When she had recovered some degree of composure she looked around
her, but the palace and gardens had vanished, and she found
herself in the open field not far from the city where her sisters
dwelt.  She repaired thither and told them the whole story of her
misfortunes, at which, pretending to grieve, those spiteful
creatures inwardly rejoiced; "for now," said they, "he will
perhaps choose one of us."  With this idea, without saying a word
of her intentions, each of them rose early the next morning and
ascended the mountain, and having reached the top, called upon
Zephyr to receive her and bear her to his lord; then leaping up,
and not being sustained by Zephyr, fell down the precipice and
was dashed to pieces.

Psyche meanwhile wandered day and night, without food or repose,
in search of her husband.  Casting her eyes on a lofty mountain
having on its brow a magnificent temple, she sighed and said to
herself, "Perhaps my love, my lord, inhabits there," and directed
her steps thither.

She had no sooner entered than she saw heaps of corn, some in
loose ears and some in sheaves, with mingled ears of barley.
Scattered about lay sickles and rakes, and all the instruments of
harvest, without order, as if thrown carelessly out of the weary
reapers' hands in the sultry hours of the day.

This unseemly confusion the pious Psyche put an end to, by
separating and sorting every thing to its proper place and kind,
believing that she ought to neglect none of the gods, but
endeavor by her piety to engage them all in her behalf.  The holy
Ceres, whose temple it was, finding her so religiously employed,
thus spoke to her: "O Psyche, truly worthy of our pity, though I
cannot shield you from the frowns of Venus, yet I can teach you
how best to allay her displeasure.  Go then, voluntarily
surrender yourself to your lady and sovereign, and try by modesty
and submission to win her forgiveness; perhaps her favor will
restore you the husband you have lost."

Psyche obeyed the commands of Ceres and took her way to the
temple of Venus, endeavoring to fortify her mind and thinking of
what she should say and how she should best propitiate the angry
goddess, feeling that the issue was doubtful and perhaps fatal.

Venus received her with angry countenance.  "Most undutiful and
faithless of servants," said she, "do you at last remember that
you really have a mistress?  Or have you rather come to see your
sick husband, yet suffering from the wound given him by his
loving wife?  You are so ill-favored and disagreeable that the
only way you can merit your lover must be by dint of industry and
diligence.  I will make trial of your housewifery."  Then she
ordered Psyche to be led to the storehouse of her temple, where
was laid up a great quantity of wheat, barley, millet, vetches,
beans, and lentils prepared for food for her doves, and said,
"Take and separate all these grains, putting all of the same kind
in a parcel by themselves, and see that you get it done before
evening."  Then Venus departed and left her to her task.

But Psyche, in perfect consternation at the enormous work, sat
stupid and silent, without moving a finger to the inextricable
heap.

While she sat despairing, Cupid stirred up the little ant, a
native of the fields, to take compassion on her.  The leader of
the ant-hill, followed by whole hosts of his six-legged subjects,
approached the heap, and with the utmost diligence taking grain
by grain, they separated the pile, sorting each kind to its
parcel; and when it was all done, they vanished out of sight in a
moment.

Venus at the approach of twilight returned from the banquet of
the gods, breathing odors and crowned with roses.  Seeing the
task done she exclaimed, "This is no work of yours wicked one,
but his, whom to your own and his misfortune you have enticed."
So saying, she threw her a piece of black bread for her supper
and went away.

Next morning Venus ordered Psyche to be called, and said to her,
"Behold yonder grove which stretches along the margin of the
water.  There you will find sheep feeding without a shepherd,
with golden-shining fleeces on their backs.  Go, fetch me a
sample of that precious wool gathered from every one of their
fleeces.

Psyche obediently went to the river-side, prepared to do her best
to execute the command.  But the river-god inspired the reeds
with harmonious murmurs, which seemed to say, "O maiden, severely
tried, tempt not the dangerous flood, nor venture among the
formidable rams on the other side, for as long as they are under
the influence of the rising sun, they burn with a cruel rage to
destroy mortals with their sharp horns or rude teeth.  But when
the noontide sun has driven the flock to the shade, and the
serene spirit of the flood has lulled them to rest, you may then
cross in safety, and you will find the woolly gold sticking to
the bushes and the trunks of the trees."

Thus the compassionate river-god gave Psyche instructions how to
accomplish her task, and by observing his directions she soon
returned to Venus with her arms full of the golden fleece; but
she received not the approbation of her implacable mistress, who
said, "I know very well it is by none of your own doings that you
have succeeded in this task, and I am not satisfied yet that you
have any capacity to make yourself useful.  But I have another
task for you.  Here, take this box, and go your way to the
infernal shades, and give this box to Proserpine, and say, 'My
mistress Venus desires you to send her a little of your beauty,
for in tending her sick son she has lost come of her own.'  Be
not too long on your errand, for I must paint myself with it to
appear at the circle of the gods and goddesses this evening."

Psyche was now satisfied that her destruction was at hand, being
obliged to go with her own feet directly down to Erebus.
Wherefore, to make no delay of what was not to be avoided, she
goes to the top of a high tower to precipitate herself headlong,
thus to descend the shortest way to the shades below.  But a
voice from the tower said to her, "Why, poor unlucky girl, dost
thou design to put an end to thy days in so dreadful a manner?
And what cowardice makes thee sink under this last danger, who
hast been so miraculously supported in all thy former?"  Then the
voice told her how by a certain cave she might reach the realms
of Pluto, and how to avoid all the dangers of the road, to pass
by Cerberus, the three-headed dog, and prevail on Charon, the
ferryman, to take her across the black river and bring her back
again.  But the voice added, "When Proserpine has given you the
box, filled with her beauty, of all things this is chiefly to be
observed by you, that you never once open or look into the box
nor allow your curiosity to pry into the treasure of the beauty
of the goddesses.

Psyche encouraged by this advice obeyed it in all things, and
taking heed to her ways travelled safely to the kingdom of Pluto.
She was admitted to the palace of Proserpine, and without
accepting the delicate seat or delicious banquet that was offered
her, but contented with coarse bread for her food, she delivered
her message from Venus.  Presently the box was returned to her,
shut and filled with the precious commodity.  Then she returned
the way she came, and glad was she to come out once more into the
light of day.

But having got so far successfully through her dangerous task a
longing desire seized her to examine the contents of the box.
"What," said she, "shall I, the carrier of this divine beauty,
not take the least bit to put on my cheeks to appear to more
advantage in the eyes of my beloved husband!:" So she carefully
opened the box, but found nothing there of any beauty at all, but
an infernal and truly Stygian sleep, which being thus set free
from its prison, took possession of her, and she fell down in the
midst of the road, a sleepy corpse without sense or motion.

But Cupid being now recovered from his wound, and not able longer
to bear the absence of his beloved Psyche, slipping through the
smallest crack of the window of his chamber which happened to be
left open, flew to the spot where Psyche lay, and gathering up
the sleep from her body closed it again in the box, and waked
Psyche with a light touch of one of his arrows.  "Again," said
he, "hast thou almost perished by the same curiosity.  But now
perform exactly the task imposed on you by my mother, and I will
take care of the rest."

Then Cupid, as swift as lightning penetrating the heights of
heaven, presented himself before Jupiter with his supplication.
Jupiter lent a favoring ear, and pleaded the cause of the lovers
so earnestly with Venus that he won her consent.  On this he sent
Mercury to bring Psyche up to the heavenly assembly, and when she
arrived, handing her a cup of ambrosia, he said, "Drink this,
Psyche, and be immortal; nor shall Cupid ever break away from the
knot in which he is tied, but these nuptials shall be perpetual."

Thus Psyche became at last united to Cupid, and in due time they
had a daughter born to them whose name was Pleasure.

The fable of Cupid and Psyche is usually considered allegorical.
The Greek name for a butterfly is Psyche, and the same word means
the soul.  There is no illustration of the immortality of the
soul so striking and beautiful as the butterfly, bursting on
brilliant wings from the tomb in which it has lain, after a dull,
grovelling caterpillar existence, to flutter in the blaze of day
and feed on the most fragrant and delicate productions of the
spring.  Psyche, then, is the human soul, which is purified by
sufferings and misfortunes, and is thus prepared for the
enjoyment of true and pure happiness.

In works of art Psyche is represented as a maiden with the wings
of a butterfly, alone or with Cupid, in the different situations
described in the allegory.

Milton alludes to the story of Cupid and Psyche in the conclusion
of his Comus:--

"Celestial Cupid, her famed son, advanced,
Holds his dear Psyche sweet entranced,
After her wandering labors long,
Till free consent the gods among
Make her his eternal bride;
And from her fair unspotted side
Two blissful twins are to be born,
Youth and Joy; so Jove hath sworn."

The allegory of the story of Cupid and Psyche is well presented
in the beautiful lines of T. K. Hervey:--

"They wove bright fables in the days of old
When reason borrowed fancy's painted wings;
When truth's clear river flowed o'er sands of gold,
And told in song its high and mystic things!
And such the sweet and solemn tale of her
The pilgrim-heart, to whom a dream was given.
That led her through the world,   Love's worshipper,
To seek on earth for him whose home was heaven!

"In the full city,   by the haunted fount,
Through the dim grotto's tracery of spars,
'Mid the pine temples, on the moonlit mount,
Where silence sits to listen to the stars;
In the deep glade where dwells the brooding dove,
The painted valley, and the scented air,
She heard far echoes of the voice of Love,
And found his footsteps' traces everywhere.

"But never more they met!  Since doubts and fears,
Those phantom-shapes that haunt and blight the earth,
Had come 'twixt her, a child of sin and tears,
And that bright spirit of immortal birth;
Until her pining soul and weeping eyes
Had learned to seek him only in the skies;
Till wings unto the weary heart were given,
And she became Love's angel bride in heaven!"

The story of Cupid and Psyche first appears in the works of
Apuleius, a writer of the second century of our era.  It is
therefore of much more recent date than most of the legends of
the Age of Fable.  It is this that Keats alludes to in his Ode to
Psyche.

"O latest born and loveliest vision far
Of all Olympus' faded hierarchy!
Fairer than Phoebe's sapphire-regioned star
Or Vesper, amorous glow-worm of the sky;
Fairer than these, though temple thou hast none,
Nor altar heaped with flowers;
Nor virgin-choir to make delicious moan
Upon the midnight hours;
No voice, no lute, no pipe, no incense sweet,
>From chain-swung censer teeming;
No shrine, no grove, no oracle, no heat
Of Pale-mouthed prophet dreaming."

In Moore's Summer Fete, a fancy ball is described, in which one
of the characters personated is Psyche.

"   not in dark disguise to-night
Hath our young heroine veiled her light;
For see, she walks the earth, Love's own.
His wedded bride, by holiest vow
Pledged in Olympus, and made known
To mortals by the type which now
Hangs glittering on her snowy brow,
That butterfly, mysterious trinket,
Which means the soul (though few would think it),
And sparkling thus on brow so white,
Tells us we've Psyche here to-night."



Chapter VII
Cadmus.   The Myrmidons.

Jupiter, under the disguise of a bull, had carried away to the
island of Crete, Europa, the daughter of Agenor king of
Phoenicia.  Agenor commanded his son Cadmus to go in search of
his sister, and not to return without her.  Cadmus went and
sought long and far for his sister, but could not find her, and
not daring to return unsuccessful, consulted the oracle of Apollo
to know what country he should settle in.  The oracle informed
him that he should find a cow in the field, and should follow her
wherever she might wander, and where she stopped, should build a
city and call it Thebes.  Cadmus had hardly left the Castalian
cave, from which the oracle was delivered, when he saw a young
cow slowly walking before him.  He followed her close, offering
at the same time his prayers to Phoebus.  The cow went on till
she passed the shallow channel of Cephisus and came out into the
plain of Panope.  There she stood still, and raising her broad
forehead to the sky, filled the air with her lowings.  Cadmus
gave thanks, and stooping down kissed the foreign soil, then
lifting his eyes, greeted the surrounding mountains. Wishing to
offer a sacrifice to Jupiter, he sent his servants to seek pure
water for a libation.  Nearby there stood an ancient grove which
had never been profaned by the axe, in the midst of which was a
cave, thick covered with the growth of bushes, its roof forming a
low arch, from beneath which burst forth a fountain of purest
water.  In the cave lurked a horrid serpent with a crested head
and scales glittering like gold.  His eyes shone like fire, his
body was swollen with venom, he vibrated a triple tongue, and
showed a triple row of teeth.  No sooner had the Tyrians (Cadmus
and his companions came from Tyre, the chief city of Phoenicia)
dipped their pitchers in the fountain, and the ingushing waters
made a sound, than the glittering serpent raised his head out of
the cave and uttered a fearful hiss.  The vessels fell from their
hands, the blood left their cheeks, they trembled in every limb.
The serpent, twisting his scaly body in a huge coil, raised his
head so as to overtop the tallest trees, and while the Tyrians
from terror could neither fight nor fly, slew some with his
fangs, others in his folds, and others with his poisonous breath.

Cadmus having waited for the return of his men till midday, went
in search of them.  His covering was a lion's hide, and besides
his javelin he carried in his hand a lance, and in his breast a
bold heart, a surer reliance than either.  When he entered the
wood and saw the lifeless bodies of his men, and the monster with
his bloody jaws, he exclaimed, "O faithful friends, I will avenge
you, or share your death."  So saying he lifted a huge stone and
threw it with all his force at the serpent.  Such a block would
have shaken the wall of a fortress, but it made no impression on
the monster.   Cadmus next threw his javelin, which met with
better success, for it penetrated the serpent's scales, and
pierced through to his entrails.  Fierce with pain the monster
turned back his head to view the wound, and attempted to draw out
the weapon with his mouth, but broke it off, leaving the iron
point rankling in his flesh.  His neck swelled with rage, bloody
foam covered his jaws, and the breath of his nostrils poisoned
the air around.  Now he twisted himself into a circle, then
stretched himself out on the ground like the trunk of a fallen
tree.  As he moved onward, Cadmus retreated before him, holding
his spear opposite to the monster's opened jaws.  The serpent
snapped at the weapon and attempted to bite its iron point.  At
last Cadmus, watching his chance, thrust the spear at a moment
when the animal's thrown back came against the trunk of a tree,
and so succeeded in pinning him to its side.  His weight bent the
tree as he struggled in the agonies of death.

While Cadmus stood over his conquered foe, contemplating its vast
size, a voice was heard (from whence he knew not, but he heard it
distinctly), commanding him to take the dragon's teeth and sow
them in the earth.  He obeyed.  He made a furrow in the ground,
and planted the teeth, destined to produce a crop of men.  Scarce
had he done so when the clods began to move, and the points of
spears to appear above the surface.  Next helmets, with their
nodding plumes, came up, and next, the shoulders and breasts and
limbs of men with weapons, and in time a harvest of armed
warriors.  Cadmus, alarmed, prepared to encounter a new enemy,
but one of them said to him, "Meddle not with our civil war."
With that he who had spoken smote one of his earth-born brothers
with a sword, and he himself fell pierced with an arrow from
another.  The latter fell victim to a fourth, and in like manner
the whole crowd dealt with each other till all fell slain with
mutual wounds except five survivors.  One of these cast away his
weapons and said, "Brothers, let us live in peace!"  These five
joined with Cadmus in building his city, to which they gave the
name of Thebes.

Cadmus obtained in marriage Harmonia, the daughter of Venus.  The
gods left Olympus to honor the occasion with their presence, and
Vulcan presented the bride with a necklace of surpassing
brilliancy, his own workmanship.  But a fatality hung over the
family of Cadmus in consequence of his killing the serpent sacred
to Mars.  Semele and Ino, his daughters, and Actaeon and
Pentheius, his grandchildren, all perished unhappily; and Cadmus
and Harmonia quitted Thebes, now grown odious to them, and
emigrated to the country of the Enchelians, who received them
with honor and made Cadmus their king.  But the misfortunes of
their children still weighed upon their minds; and one day Cadmus
exclaimed, "If a serpent's life is so dear to the gods, I would I
were myself a serpent."  No sooner had he uttered the words than
he began to change his form.  Harmonia beheld it, and prayed to
the gods to let her share his fate.  Both became serpents.  They
lie in the woods, but mindful of their origin they neither avoid
the presence of man nor do they ever injure any one.

There is a tradition that Cadmus introduced into Greece the
letters of the alphabet which were invented by the Phoenicians.
This is alluded to by Byron, where, addressing the modern Greeks,
he says:

"You have the letters Cadmus gave,
Think you he meant them for a slave?"

Milton, describing the serpent which tempted Eve, is reminded of
the serpents of the classical stories, and says,

"-----pleasing was his shape,
And lovely; never since of serpent kind
Lovelier; not those that in Illyria changed
Hermione and Cadmus, nor the god
in Epidaurus."

The "god in Epidaurus" was AEsculapius.  Serpents were held
sacred to him.

THE MYRMIDONS

The Myrmidons were the soldiers of Achilles in the Trojan war.
>From them all zealous and unscrupulous followers of a political
chief are called by that name down to this day.  But the origin
of the Myrmidons would not give one the idea of a fierce and
bloody race, but rather of a laborious and peaceful one.

Cephalus, king of Athens, arrived in the island of AEgina to seek
assistance of his old friend and ally AEacus, the king, in his
wars with Minos, king of Crete.  Cephalus was kindly received,
and the desired assistance readily promised.  "I have people
enough," said AEacus, "to protect myself and spare you such a
force as you need."  "I rejoice to see it," replied Cephalus,
"and my wonder has been raised, I confess, to find such a host of
youths as I see around me, all apparently of about the same age.
Yet there are many individuals whom I previously knew that I look
for now in vain.  What has become of them?"  AEacus groaned, and
replied with a voice of sadness, "I have been intending to tell
you, and will now do so without more delay, that you may see how
from the saddest beginning a happy result sometimes flows.  Those
whom you formerly knew are now dust and ashes!  A plague sent by
angry Juno devastated the land.  She hated it because it bore the
name of one of her husband's female favorites.  While the disease
appeared to spring from natural causes we resisted it as we best
might by natural remedies; but it soon appeared that the
pestilence was too powerful for our efforts, and we yielded.  At
the beginning the sky seemed to settle down upon the earth, and
thick clouds shut in the heated air.  For four months together a
deadly south wind prevailed.  The disorder affected the wells and
springs; thousands of snakes crept over the land and shed their
poison in the fountains.  The force of the disease was first
spent on the lower animals; dogs, cattle, sheep, and birds.  The
luckless ploughman wondered to see his oxen fall in the midst of
their work, and lie helpless in the unfinished furrow.  The wool
fell from the bleating sheep, and their bodies pined away.  The
horse, once foremost in the race, contested the palm no more, but
groaned at his stall, and died an inglorious death.  The wild
boar forgot his rage, the stag his swiftness, the bears no longer
attacked the herds.  Everything languished; dead bodies lay in
the roads, the fields, and the woods; the air was poisoned by
them.  I tell you what is hardly credible, but neither dogs nor
birds would touch them, nor starving wolves.  Their decay spread
the infection.  Next the disease attacked the country people, and
then the dwellers in the city.  At first the cheek was flushed,
and the breath drawn with difficulty.  The tongue grew rough and
swelled, and the dry mouth stood open with its veins enlarged and
gasped for the air.  Men could not bear the heat of their clothes
or their beds, but preferred to lie on the bare ground; and the
ground did not cool them, but on the contrary, they heated the
spot where they lay.  Nor could the physicians help, for the
disease attacked them also, and the contact of the sick gave them
infection, so that the most faithful were the first victims.  At
last all hope of relief vanished and men learned to look upon
death as the only deliverer from disease.  Then they gave way to
every inclination, and cared not to ask what was expedient, for
nothing was expedient.  All restraint laid aside, they crowded
around the wells and fountains, and drank till they died, without
quenching thirst.  Many had not strength to get away from the
water, but died in the midst of the stream, and others would
drink of it notwithstanding.  Such was their weariness of their
sick-beds that some would creep forth, and if not strong enough
to stand, would die on the ground.  They seemed to hate their
friends, and got away from their homes, as if, not knowing the
cause of their sickness, they charged it on the place of their
abode.  Some were seen tottering along the road, as long as they
could stand, while others sank on the earth, and turned their
dying eyes around to take a last look, then closed them in death.

"What heart had I left me, during all this, or what ought I to
have had, except to hate life and wish to be with my dead
subjects?  On all sides lay my people strewn like over-ripened
apples beneath the tree, or acorns under the storm-shaken oak.
You see yonder s temple on the height.  It is sacred to Jupiter.
Oh, how many offered prayers there; husbands for wives, fathers
for sons, and died in the very act of supplication!  How often,
while the priest made ready for sacrifice, the victim fell,
struck down by disease without waiting for the blow.  At length
all reverence for sacred things was lost.  Bodies were thrown out
unburied, wood was wanting for funeral piles, men fought with one
another for the possession of them.  Finally there were none left
to mourn; sons and husbands, old men and youths, perished alike
unlamented.

"Standing before the altar I raised my eyes to heaven.  'Oh,
Jupiter,' I said, 'if thou art indeed my father, and art not
ashamed of thy offspring, give me back my people, or take me also
away!'  At these words a clap of thunder was heard.  'I accept
the omen,' I cried; 'oh, may it be a sign of a favorable
disposition towards me!'  By chance there grew by the place where
I stood an oak with wide-spreading branches, sacred to Jupiter.
I observed a troop of ants busy with their labor, carrying minute
grains in their mouths and following one another in a line up the
trunk of the tree.  Observing their numbers with admiration, I
said, 'Give me, oh father, citizens as numerous as these, and
replenish my empty city.'  The tree shook and gave a rustling
sound with its branches though no wind agitated them.  I trembled
in every limb, yet I kissed the earth and the tree.  I would not
confess to myself that I hoped, yet I did hope.  Night came on
and sleep took possession of my frame oppressed with cares.  The
tree stood before me in my dreams, with its numerous branches all
covered with living, moving creatures.  It seemed to shake its
limbs and throw down over the ground a multitude of those
industrious grain-gathering animals, which appeared to gain in
size, and grow larger, and by-and-by to stand erect, lay aside
their superfluous legs and their black color, and finally to
assume the human form.  Then I awoke, and my first impulse was to
chide the gods who had robbed me of a sweet vision and given me
no reality in its place.  Being still in the temple my attention
was caught by the sound of many voices without; a sound of late
unusual to my ears.  While I began to think I was yet dreaming,
Telamon, my son, throwing open the temple-gates, exclaimed,
'Father, approach, and behold things surpassing even your hopes!'
I went forth; I saw a multitude of men, such as I had seen in my
dream, and they were passing in procession in the same manner.
While I gazed with wonder and delight they approached, and
kneeling, hailed me as their king.  I paid my vows to Jove, and
proceeded to allot the vacant city to the new-born race, and to
parcel out the fields among them.  I called them Myrmidons from
the ant (myrmex), from which they sprang.  You have seen these
persons; their dispositions resemble those which they had in
their former shape.  They are a diligent and industrious race,
eager to gain, and tenacious of their gains.  Among them you may
recruit your forces.  They will follow you to the war, young in
years and bold in heart."

This description of the plague is copied by Ovid from the account
which Thucydides, the Greek historian, gives of the plague of
Athens.  The historian drew from life, and all the poets and
writers of fiction since his day, when they have had occasion to
describe a similar scene, have borrowed their details from him.


Chapter VIII
Nisus and Scylla.   Echo and Narcissus.   Clytie.   Hero and
Leander

Minos, king of Crete, made war upon Megara.  Nisus was king of
Megara, and Scylla was his daughter.  The siege had now lasted
six months, and the city still held out, for it was decreed by
fate that it should not be taken so long as a certain purple
lock, which glittered among the hair of King Nisus, remained on
his head.  There was a tower on the city walls, which overlooked
the plain where Minos and his army were encamped.  To this tower
Scylla used to repair, and look abroad over the tents of the
hostile army.  The siege had lasted so long that she had learned
to distinguish the persons of the leaders.  Minos, in particular,
excited her admiration.  She admired his graceful deportment; if
he threw his javelin, skill seemed combined with force in the
discharge; if he drew his bow, Apollo himself could not have done
it more gracefully.  But when he laid aside his helmet, and in
his purple robes bestrode his white horse with its gay
caparisons, and reined in its foaming mouth, the daughter of
Nisus was hardly mistress of herself; she was almost frantic with
admiration.  She envied the weapon that he grasped, the reins
that he held.  She felt as if she could, if it were possible, go
to him through the hostile ranks; she felt an impulse to cast
herself down from the tower into the midst of his camp, or to
open the gates to him, or do anything else, so only it might
gratify Minos.  As she sat in the tower, she talked thus with
herself: "I know not whether to rejoice or grieve at this sad
war.  I grieve that Minos is our enemy; but I rejoice at any
cause that brings him to my sight.  Perhaps he would be willing
to grant us peace, and receive me as a hostage.  I would fly
down, if I could, and alight in his camp, and tell him that we
yield ourselves to his mercy.  But, then, to betray my father!
No!  Rather would I never see Minos again.  And yet no doubt it
is sometimes the best thing for a city to be conquered when the
conqueror is clement and generous.  Minos certainly has right on
his side.  I think we shall be conquered; and if that must be the
end of it, why should not love unbar the gates to him, instead of
leaving it to be done by war?  Better spare delay and slaughter
if we can.  And, oh, if any one should wound or kill Minos!  No
one surely would have the heart to do it; yet ignorantly, not
knowing him, one might.  I will, I will surrender myself to him,
with my country as a dowry, and so put an end to the war.  But
how?  The gates are guarded, and my father keeps the keys; he
only stands in my way.  Oh, that it might please the gods to take
him away! But why ask the gods to do it?  Another woman, loving
as I do, would remove with her own hands whatever stood in the
way of her love.  And can any other woman dare more than I?  I
would encounter fire and sword to gain my object; but here there
is no need of fire and sword.  I only need my father's purple
lock.  More precious than gold to me, that will give me all I
wish."

While she thus reasoned night came on, and soon the whole palace
was buried in sleep.  She entered her father's bedchamber and cut
off the fatal lock; then passed out of the city and entered the
enemy's camp.  She demanded to be led to the king, and thus
addressed him: "I am Scylla, the daughter of Nisus.  I surrender
to you my country and my father's house.  I ask no reward but
yourself; for love of you I have done it.  See here the purple
lock!  With this I give you my father and his kingdom."  She held
out her hand with the fatal spoil.  Minos shrunk back and refused
to touch it.  "The gods destroy thee, infamous woman," he
exclaimed; "disgrace of our time!  May neither earth nor sea
yield thee a resting place!  Surely, my Crete, where Jove himself
was cradled, shall not be polluted with such a monster!"  Thus he
said, and gave orders that equitable terms should be allowed to
the conquered city, and that the fleet should immediately sail
from the island.

Scylla was frantic.  "Ungrateful man," she exclaimed, "is it thus
you leave me?   Me who have given you victory,   who have
sacrificed for you parent and country!  I am guilty, I confess,
and deserve to die, by not by your hand."  As the ships left the
shore, she leaped into the water, and seizing the rudder of the
one which carried Minos, she was borne along an unwelcome
companion of their course.  A sea-eagle soaring aloft,   it was
her father who had been changed into that form,   seeing her,
pounced down upon her, and struck her with his beak and claws.
In terror she let go the ship, and would have fallen into the
water, but some pitying deity changed her into a bird.  The sea-
eagle still cherishes the old animosity; and whenever he espies
her in his lofty flight, you may see him dart down upon her, with
beak and claws, to take vengeance for the ancient crime.

ECHO AND NARCISSUS

Echo was a beautiful nymph, fond of the woods and hills, where
she devoted herself to woodland sports.  She was a favorite of
Diana, and attended her in the chase.  But Echo had one failing;
she was fond of talking, and whether in chat or argument would
have the last word.  One day Juno was seeking her husband, who,
she had reason to fear, was amusing himself among the nymphs.
Echo by her talk contrived to detain the goddess till the nymphs
made their escape.  When Juno discovered it, she passed sentence
upon Echo in these words: "You shall forfeit the use of that
tongue with which you have cheated me, except for that one
purpose you are so fond of   REPLY.  You shall still have the
last word, but no power to speak first."

This nymph saw Narcissus, a beautiful youth, as he pursued the
chase upon the mountains.  She loved him, and followed his
footsteps.  Oh, how she longed to address him in the softest
accents, and win him to converse, but it was not in her power.
She waited with impatience for him to speak first, and had her
answer ready.  One day the youth, being separated from his
companions, shouted aloud, "Who's here?"  Echo replied, "Here."
Narcissus looked around, but seeing no one, called out, "Come."
Echo answered, "Come."  As no one came, Narcissus called again,
"Why do you shun me?"  Echo asked the same question.  "Let us
join one another," said the youth.  The maid answered with all
her heart in the same words, and hastened to the spot, ready to
throw her arms about his neck.  He started back, exclaiming,
"Hands off!  I would rather die than you should have me."  "Have
me," said she; but it was all in vain.  He left her, and she went
to hide her blushes in the recesses of the woods.  From that time
forth she lived in caves and among mountain cliffs.  Her form
faded with grief, till at last all her flesh shrank away.  Her
bones were changed into rocks, and there was nothing left of her
but her voice.  With that she is still ready to reply to any one
who calls her, and keeps up her old habit of having the last
word.

Narcissus was cruel not in this case alone.  He shunned all the
rest of the nymphs as he had done poor Echo.  One day a maiden,
who had in vain endeavored to attract him, uttered a prayer that
he might some time or other feel what it was to love and meet no
return of affection.  The avenging goddess heard and granted the
prayer.

There was a clear fountain, with water like silver, to which the
shepherds never drove their flocks.  Nor did the mountain goats
resort to it, nor any of the beasts of the forest; neither was it
defaced with fallen leaves or branches; but the grass grew fresh
around it, and the rocks sheltered it from the sun.  Hither came
one day the youth fatigued with hunting, heated and thirsty.  He
stooped down to drink, and saw his own image in the water; he
thought it was some beautiful water=spirit living in the
fountain.  He stood gazing with admiration at those bright eyes,
those locks curled like the locks of Bacchus or Apollo, the
rounded cheeks, the ivory neck, the parted lips, and the glow of
health and exercise over all.  He fell in love with himself.  He
brought his lips near to take a kiss; he plunged his arms in to
embrace the beloved object.  It fled at the touch, but returned
again after a moment and renewed the fascination.  He could not
tear himself away; he lost all thought of food or rest, while he
hovered over the brink of the fountain gazing upon his own image.
He talked with the supposed spirit: "Why, beautiful being, do you
shun me?  Surely my face is not one to repel you.  The nymphs
love me, and you yourself look not indifferent upon me.  When I
stretch forth my arms you do the same; and you smile upon me and
answer my beckonings with the like."  His tears fell into the
water and disturbed the image.  As he saw it depart, he
exclaimed, "Stay, I entreat you! Let me at least gaze upon you,
if I may not touch you."   With this, and much more of the same
kind, he cherished the flame that consumed him, so that by
degrees he lost his color, his vigor, and the beauty which
formerly had so charmed the nymph Echo.  She kept near him,
however, and when he exclaimed, "Alas!  Alas!" she answered him
with the same words.  He pined away and died; and when his shade
passed the Stygian river, it leaned over the boat to catch a look
of itself in the waters.  The nymphs mourned for him, especially
the water-nymphs; and when they smote their breasts, Echo smote
hers also.  They prepared a funeral pile, and would have burned
the body, but it was nowhere to be found; but in its place a
flower, purple within, and surrounded with white leaves, which
bears the name and preserves the memory of Narcissus.

Milton alludes to the story of Echo and Narcissus in the Lady's
song in Comus.  She is seeking her brothers in the forest, and
sings to attract their attention.

"Sweet Echo, sweetest nymph, that liv'st unseen
Within thy aery shell
By slow Meander's margent green.
And in the violet-embroidered vale,
Where the love-lorn nightingale
Nightly to thee her sad song mourneth well;
Canst thou not tell me of a gentle pair
That likes thy Narcissus are?
Oh, if thou have
Hid them in some flowery cave,
Tell me but where,
Sweet queen of parly, daughter of the sphere,
So may'st thou be translated to the skies,
And give resounding grace to all heaven's harmonies."

Milton has imitated the story of Narcissus in the account which
he makes Eve give of the first sight of herself reflected in the
fountain:

"That day I oft remember when from sleep
I first awaked, and found myself reposed
Under a shade on flowers, much wondering where
And what I was, whence thither brought, and how
Not distant far from thence a murmuring sound
Of waters issued from a cave, and spread
Into a liquid plain, then stood unmoved
Pure as the expanse of heaven; I thither went
With unexperienced thought, and laid me down
On the green bank, to look into the clear
Smooth lake that to me seemed another sky.
As I bent down to look, just opposite
A shape within the watery gleam appeared,
Bending to look on me.  I started back;
It started back; but pleased I soon returned,
Pleased it returned as soon with answering looks
Of sympathy and love.  There had I fixed
Mine eyes till now, and pined with vain desire,
Had not a voice thus warned me: 'What thou seest,
What there thou seest, fair creature, is thyself.'"
Paradise Lost, Book IV

The fable of Narcissus is often alluded to by the poets.  Here
are two epigrams which treat it in different ways.  The first is
by Goldsmith:

"ON A BEAUTIFUL YOUTH STRUCK BLIND BY LIGHTNING:

"Sure 'twas by Providence designed,
Rather in pity than in hate,
That he should be like Cupid blind,
To save him from Narcissus' fate"

The other is by Cowper:

"ON AN UGLY FELLOW

"Beware, my friend, of crystal brook
Or fountain, lest that hideous hook.
Thy nose, thou chance to see;
Narcissus' fate would then be thine,
And self-detested thou would'st pine,
As self-enamored he."


CLYTIE

Clytie was a water-nymph and in love with Apollo, who made her no
return.  So she pined away, sitting all day long upon the cold
ground, with her unbound tresses streaming over her shoulders.
Nine days she sat and tasted neither food nor drink, her own
tears and the chilly dew her only food.  She gazed on the sun
when he rose, and as he passed through his daily course to his
setting; she saw no other object, her face turned constantly on
him.  At last, they say, her limbs rooted in the ground, her face
became a sunflower, which turns on its stem so as always to face
the sun throughout its daily course; for it retains to that
extent the feeling of the nymph from whom it sprang.

One of the best known of the marble busts discovered in our own
time, generally bears the name of Clytie.  It has been very
frequently copied in plaster.  It represents the head of a young
girl looking down,   the neck and shoulders being supported in
the cup of a large flower,   which by a little effort of
imagination can be made into a giant sunflower.  The latest
supposition, however, is that this bust represented not Clytie,
but Isis.

Hood in his Flowers thus alludes to Clytie:

"I will not have the mad Clytie,
Whose head is turned by the sun;
The tulip is a courtly quean,
Whom therefore I will shun;
The cowslip is a country wench,
The violet is a nun;
But I will woo the dainty rose,
The queen of every one."

The sunflower is a favorite emblem of constancy.  Thus Moore uses
it:

"The heart that has truly loved never forgets,
But as truly loves on to the close;
As the sunflower turns on her god when he sets
The same look that she turned when he rose."

It is only for convenience that the modern poets translate the
Latin word HELIOTROPIUM, by the English sunflower.  The
sunflower, which was known to the ancients, was called in Greek,
helianthos, from HELIOS, the sun; and ANTHOS a flower, and in
Latin, helianthus.  It derives its name from its resemblance to
the sun; but, as any one may see, at sunset, it does not "turn to
the God when he sets the same look that it turned when he rose."

The Heliotrope of the fable of Clytie is called Turn-sole in old
English books, and such a plant is known in England.  It is not
the sweet heliotrope of modern gardens, which is a South American
plant.  The true classical heliotrope is probably to be found in
the heliotrope of southern France,   a weed not known in America.
The reader who is curious may examine the careful account of it
in Larousse's large dictionary.


HERO AND LEANDER

Leander was a youth of Abydos, a town of the Asian side of the
strait which separates Asia and Europe.  On the opposite shore in
the town of Sestos lived the maiden Hero, a priestess of Venus.
Leander loved her, and used to swim the strait nightly to enjoy
the company of his mistress, guided by a torch which she reared
upon the tower, for the purpose.  But one night a tempest arose
and the sea was rough; his strength failed, and he was drowned.
The waves bore his body to the European shore, where Hero became
aware of his death, and in her despair cast herself down from the
tower into the sea and perished.

The following sonnet is by Keats:

"ON A PICTURE OF LEANDER

"Come hither, all sweet maidens, soberly,
Down looking aye, and with a chasten'd light,
Hid in the fringes of your eyelids white,
And meekly let your fair hands joined be,
As if so gentle that ye could not see,
Untouch'd, a victim of your beauty bright,
Sinking away to his young spirit's night,
Sinking bewilder'd 'mid the dreary sea.
'Tis young Leander toiling to his death.
Nigh swooning, he doth purse his weary lips
For Hero's cheek, and smiles against her smile.
Oh, horrid dream!  See how his body dips
Dead-heavy; arms and shoulders gleam awhile;
He's gone; up bubbles all his amorous breath!"

The story of Leander's swimming the Hellespont was looked upon as
fabulous, and the feat considered impossible, till Lord Byron
proved its possibility by performing it himself.  In the Bride of
Abydos he says,

"These limbs that buoyant wave hath borne."

The distance in the narrowest part is almost a mile, and there is
a constant current setting out from the Sea of Marmora into the
Archipelago.  Since Byron's time the feat has been achieved by
others; but it yet remains a test of strength and skill in the
art of swimming sufficient to give a wide and lasting celebrity
to any one of our readers who may dare to make the attempt and
succeed in accomplishing it.

In the beginning of the second canto of the same poem, Byron
alludes to this story:

"The winds are high on Helle's wave,
As on that night of stormiest water,
When Love, who sent, forgot to save
The young, the beautiful, the brave,
The lonely hope of Sestos' daughter.
Oh, when alone along the sky
The turret-torch was blazing high,
Though rising gale and breaking foam,
And shrieking sea-birds warned him home;
And clouds aloft and tides below,
With signs and sounds forbade to go,
He could not see, he would not hear
Or sound or sight foreboding fear.
His eye but saw that light of love,
The only star it hailed above;
His ear but rang with Hero's song,
'Ye waves, divide not lovers long.'
That tale is old, but love anew
May nerve young hearts to prove as true."

The subject has been a favorite one with sculptors.

Schiller has made one of his finest ballads from the tragic fate
of the two lovers.  The following verses are a translation from
the latter part of the ballad:

"Upon Hellespont's broad currents
Night broods black, and rain in torrents
>From the cloud's full bosom pours;
Lightnings in the sky are flashing,
All the storms below are dashing
On the crag-piled shores.
Awful chasms gaping widely,
Separate the mountain waves;
Ocean yawning as to open
Downward e'en to Pluto's caves."

After the storm has arisen, Hero sees the danger, and cries,

"Woe, ah!  Woe; great Jove have pity,
Listen to my sad entreaty,
Yet for what can Hero pray?
Should the gods in pity listen,
He, e'en now the false abyss in,
Struggles with the tempest's spray.
All the birds that skim the wave
In hasty flight are hieing home;
T the lee of safer haven
All the storm-tossed vessels come.

"Ah!  I know he laughs at danger,
Dares again the frequent venture,
Lured by an almighty power;
For he swore it when we parted,
With the vow which binds true-hearted
Lovers to the latest hour.
Yes!  Even as this moment hastens
Battles he the wave-crests rude,
And to their unfathomed chasms
Dags him down the angry flood.

"Pontus false!  Thy sunny smile
Was the lying traitor's guile,
Like a mirror flashing there:
All thy ripples gently playing
Til they triumphed in betraying
Him into thy lying snare.
Now in thy mid-current yonder,
Onward still his course he urges,
Thou the false, on him the fated
Pouring loose thy terror-surges.
Waxes high the tempest's danger,
Waves to mountains rise in anger,
Oceans swell, and breakers dash,
Foaming, over cliffs of rock
Where even navies, stiff with oak,
Could not bear the crash.
In the gale her torch is blasted,
Beacon of the hoped-for strand;
Horror broods above the waters,
Horror broods above the land.

Prays she Venus to assuage
The hurricane's increasing rage,
And to sooth the billows' scorn.
And as gale on gale arises,
Vows to each   as sacrifices
Spotless steer with gilded horn.
To all the goddesses below,
To "all the gods in heaven that be,"
She prays that oil of peace may flow
Softly on the storm-tossed sea.

Blest Leucothea, befriend me!
>From cerulean halls attend me;
Hear my prayer of agony.
In the ocean desert's raving,
Storm-tossed seamen, succor craving,
Find in thee their helper nigh.
Wrap him in thy charmed veil,
Secret spun and secret wove,
Certain from the deepest wave
To lift him to its crests above."

Now the tempests wild are sleeping,
And from the horizon creeping
Rays of morning streak the skies,
Peaceful as it lay before
The placid sea reflects the shore,
Skies kiss waves and waves the skies.
Little ripples, lightly plashing,
Break upon the rock-bound strand,
And they trickle, lightly playing
O'er a corpse upon the sand.

Yes, 'tis he!  Although he perished,
Still his sacred troth he cherished,
An instant's glance tells all to her;
Not a tear her eye lets slip
Not a murmur leaves her lip;
Down she looks in cold despair;
Gazes round the desert sea,
Trustless gazes round the sky,
Flashes then of noble fire
Through her pallid visage fly!

"Yes, I know, ye mighty powers,
Ye have drawn the fated hours
Pitiless and cruel on.
Early full my course is over.
Such a course with such a lover;
Such a share of joy I've known.
Venus, queen, within thy temple,
Thou hast known me vowed as thine,
Now accept thy willing priestess
As an offering at thy shrine."

Downward then, while all in vain her
Fluttering robes would still sustain her,
Springs she into Pontus' wave;
Grasping him and her, the god
Whirls them in his deepest flood,
And, himself, becomes their grave.
With his prizes then contented,
Peaceful bids his waters glide,
>From the unexhausted vessels,
Whence there streams an endless tide.


Chapter IX
Minerva and Arachne.   Niobe.   The Story of Perseus

Minerva, the goddess of wisdom, was the daughter of Jupiter.
She, they say, sprang forth from his brain full grown and clad in
complete armor.  She presided over the useful and ornamental
arts, both those of men,   such as agriculture and navigation,
and those of women,   spinning, weaving, and needle-work.  She
was also a warlike divinity; but a lover of defensive war only.
She had no sympathy with Mars's savage love of violence and
bloodshed.  Athens was her chosen seat, her own city, awarded to
her as the prize of a contest with Neptune, who also aspired to
it.  The tale ran that in the reign of Cecrops, the first king of
Athens, the two deities contended for the possession of the city.
The gods decreed that it should be awarded to that one who
produced the gift most useful to mortals.  Neptune gave the
horse; Minerva produced the olive.  The gods gave judgment that
the olive was the more useful of the two, and awarded the city to
the goddess; and it was named after her, Athens, her name in
Greek being Athene.

In another contest, a mortal dared to come in competition with
Minerva.  That mortal was Arachne, a maiden who had attained such
skill in the arts of weaving and embroidery that the nymphs
themselves would leave their groves and fountains to come and
gaze upon her work.  It was not only beautiful when it was done,
but beautiful also in the doing. To watch her, as she took the
wool in its rude state and formed it into rolls, or separated it
with her fingers and carded it till it looked as light and soft
as a cloud, or twirled the spindle with skilful touch, or wove
the web, or, when woven, adorned it with her needle, one would
have said that Minerva herself had taught her.  But this she
denied, and could not bear to be thought a pupil even of a
goddess.  "Let Minerva try her skill with mine," said she; "if
beaten, I will pay the penalty."  Minerva heard this and was
displeased.  Assuming the form of an old woman, she went and gave
Arachne some friendly advice.  "I have had much experience,: said
she, "and I hope you will not despise my counsel.  Challenge your
fellow-mortals as you will, but do not compete with a goddess.
On the contrary, I advise you to ask her forgiveness for what you
have said, and, as she is merciful, perhaps she will pardon you."
Arachne stopped her spinning, and looked at the old dame with
anger in her countenance.  "Keep your counsel," said she, "for
your daughters or handmaids; for my part, I know what I say, and
I stand to it.  I am not afraid of the goddess; let her try her
skill, if she dare venture."  "She comes," said Minerva; and
dropping her disguise, stood confessed.  The nymphs bent low in
homage, and all the bystanders paid reverence.  Arachne alone was
unterrified.  She blushed, indeed; a sudden color dyed her cheek,
and then she grew pale.  But she stood to her resolve, and with a
foolish conceit of her own skill rushed on her fate.  Minerva
forbore no longer, nor interposed any further advice.  They
proceed to the contest.  Each takes her station and attaches the
web to the beam.  Then the slender shuttle is passed in and out
among the threads.  The reed with its fine teeth strikes up the
woof into its place and compacts the web.  Both work with speed;
their skilful hands move rapidly, and the excitement of the
contest makes the labor light.  Wool of Tyrian dye is contrasted
with that of other colors, shaded off into one another so
adroitly that the joining deceives the eye.  Like the bow, whose
long arch tinges the heavens, formed by sunbeams reflected from
the shower (this description of the rainbow is literally
translated rom Ovid), in which, where the colors meet they seem
as one, but at a little distance from the point of contact are
wholly different.

Minerva wrought on her web the scene of her contest with Neptune.
Twelve of the heavenly powers are represented, Jupiter, with
August gravity, sitting in the midst.  Neptune, the ruler of the
sea, holds his trident, and appears to have just smitten the
earth, from which a horse has leaped forth.  Minerva depicted
herself with helmed head, her AEgis covering her breast.  Such
was the central circle; and in the four corners were represented
incidents illustrating the displeasure of the gods at such
presumptuous mortals as had dared to contend with them.  These
were meant as warnings to her rival to give up the contest before
it was too late.

Arachne filled her web with subjects designedly chosen to exhibit
the failings and errors of the gods.  One scene represented Leda
caressing the swan, under which form Jupiter had disguised
himself; and another, Danae, in the brazen tower in which her
father had imprisoned her, but where the god effected his
entrance in the form of a shower of gold.  Still another depicted
Europa deceived by Jupiter under the disguise of a bull.
Encouraged by the tameness of the animal, Europa ventured to
mount his back, whereupon Jupiter advanced into the sea, and swam
with her to Crete.  You would have thought it was a real bull so
naturally was it wrought, and so natural was the water in which
it swam.  She seemed to look with longing eyes back upon the
shore she was leaving, and to call to her companions for help.
She appeared to shudder with terror at the sight of the heaving
waves, and to draw back her feet from the water.

Arachne filled her canvas with these and like subjects,
wonderfully well done, but strongly marking her presumption and
impiety.  Minerva could not forbear to admire, yet felt indignant
at the insult.  She struck the web with her shuttle, and rent it
in pieces; she then touched the forehead of Arachne, and made her
feel her guilt and shame.  She could not endure it, and went and
hanged herself.  Minerva pitied her as she saw her hanging by a
rope.  "Live, guilty woman," said she; " and that you may
preserve the memory of this lesson, continue to hang, you and
your descendants, to all future times."  She sprinkled her with
the juices of aconite, and immediately her hair came off, and her
nose and ears likewise.  Her form shrank up, and her head grew
smaller yet; her fingers grew to her side, and served for legs.
All the rest of her is body, out of which she spins her thread,
often hanging suspended by it, in the same attitude as when
Minerva touched her and transformed her into a spider.

Spenser tells the story of Arachne in his Muiopotmos, adhering
very closely to his master Ovid, but improving upon him in the
conclusion of the story.  The two stanzas which follow tell what
was done after the goddess had depicted her creation of the olive
tree:

"Amongst these leaves she made a Butterfly,
With excellent device and wondrous slight,
Fluttering among the olives wantonly,
That seemed to live, so like it was in sight;
The velvet nap which on his wings doth lie,
The silken down with which his back is dight,
His broad outstretched horns, his hairy thighs,
His glorious colors, and his glistening eyes."

"Which when Arachne saw, as overlaid
And mastered with workmanship so rare.
She stood astonished long, ne aught gainsaid;
And with fast-fixed eyes on her did stare,
And by her silence, sign of one dismayed,
The victory did yield her as her share;
Yet did she inly fret and felly burn,
And all her blood to poisonous rancor turn."

And so the metamorphosis is caused by Arachne's own mortification
and vexation, and not by any direct act of the goddess.

The following specimen of old-fashioned gallantry is by Garrick:


UPON A LADY'S EMBROIDERY

"Arachne once, as poets tell,
A goddess at her art defied,
And soon the daring mortal fell
The hapless victim of her pride.

"Oh, then, beware Arachne's fate;
Be prudent, Chloe, and submit,
For you'll most surely meet her hate,
Who rival both her art and wit."

Tennyson, in his Palace of Art, describing the works of art with
which the palace was adorned, thus alludes to Europa:

"------ sweet Europa's mantle blew unclasped
>From off her shoulder, backward borne,
>From one hand drooped a crocus, one hand grasped
The mild bull's golden horn."

In his Princess there is this allusion to Danae:

"Now lies the earth all Danae to the stars,
And all thy heart lies open unto me."


NIOBE

The fate of Arachne was noised abroad through all the country,
and served as a warning to all presumptuous mortals not to
compare themselves with the divinities.  But one, and she a
matron too, failed to learn the lesson of humility.  It was
Niobe, the queen of Thebes.  She had indeed much to be proud of;
but it was not her husband's fame, nor her own beauty, nor their
great descent, nor the power of their kingdom that elated her.
It was her children; and truly the happiest of mothers would
Niobe have been, if only she had not claimed to be so.  It was on
occasion of the annual celebration in honor of Latona and her
offspring,   Apollo and Diana,   when the people of Thebes were
assembled, their brows crowned with laurel, bearing frankincense
to the altars and paying their vows,   that Niobe appeared among
the crowd.  Her attire was splendid with gold and gems, and her
face as beautiful as the face of an angry woman can be.  She
stood and surveyed the people with haughty looks.  "What folly,"
said she, "is this!   to prefer beings whom you never saw to
those who stand before your eyes!  Why should Latona be honored
with worship rather than I?  My father was Tantalus, who was
received as a guest at the table of the gods; my mother was a
goddess.  My husband built and rules this city, Thebes; and
Phrygia is my paternal inheritance.  Wherever I turn my eyes I
survey the elements of my power; nor is my form and presence
unworthy of a goddess.  To all this let me add, I have seven sons
and seven daughters, and look for sons-in-law and daughters-in-
law of pretensions worthy of my alliance.  Have I not cause for
pride?  Will you prefer to me this Latona, the Titan's daughter,
with her two children?  I have seven times as many.  Fortunate
indeed am I, and fortunate I shall remain!  Will any one deny
this?  My abundance is my security.  I feel myself too strong for
Fortune to subdue.  She may take from me much; I shall still have
much left.  Were I to lose some of my children, I should hardly
be left as poor as Latona with her two only.  Away with you from
these solemnities,   put off the laurel from your brows,   have
done with this worship!"  The people obeyed, and left the sacred
services uncompleted.

The goddess was indignant.  On top of Mount Cynthus where she
dwelt, she thus addressed her son and daughter: "My children, I
who have been so proud of you both, and have been used to hold
myself second to none of the goddesses except Juno alone, begin
now to doubt whether I am indeed a goddess.  I shall be deprived
of my worship altogether unless you protect me."  She was
proceeding in this strain, but Apollo interrupted her.  "Say no
more," said he; "speech only delays punishment."  So said Diana
also.  Darting through the air, veiled in clouds, they alighted
on the towers of the city.  Spread out before the gates was a
broad plain, where the youth of the city pursued their warlike
sports.  The sons of Niobe were there among the rest,   some
mounted on spirited horses richly caparisoned, some driving gay
chariots.  Ismenos, the first-born, as he guided his foaming
steeds, struck with an arrow from above, cried out, "Ah, me!"
dropped the reins and fell lifeless.  Another, hearing the sound
of the bow,   like a boatman who sees the storm gathering and
makes all sail for the port,   gave the rein to his horses and
attempted to escape.  The inevitable arrow overtook him as he
fled.  Two others, younger boys, just from their tasks, had gone
to the playground to have a game of wrestling.  As they stood
breast to breast, one arrow pierced them both.  They uttered a
cry together, together cast a parting look around them, and
together breathed their last.  Alphenor, an elder brother, seeing
them fall, hastened to the spot to render them assistance, and
fell stricken in the act of brotherly duty.  One only was left,
Ilioneus.  He raised his arms to heaven to try whether prayer
might not avail.  "Spare me, ye gods!" he cried, addressing all,
in his ignorance that all needed not his intercession; and Apollo
would have spared him, but the arrow had already left the string,
and it was too late.

The terror of the people and grief of the attendants soon made
Niobe acquainted with what had taken place.  She could hardly
think it possible; she was indignant that the gods had dared and
amazed that they had been able to do it.  Her husband, Amphion,
overwhelmed with the blow, destroyed himself.  Alas!  How
different was this Niobe from her who had so lately driven away
the people from the sacred rites, and held her stately course
through the city, the envy of her friends, now the pity even of
her foes!  She knelt over the lifeless bodies, and kissed, now
one, now another of her dead sons.  Raising her pallid arms to
heaven, "Cruel Latona," said she, "feed full your rage with my
anguish!  Satiate your hard heart, while I follow to the grave my
seven sons.  Yet where is your triumph?  Bereaved as I am, I am
still richer than you, my conqueror.  Scarce had she spoken when
the bow sounded and struck terror into all hearts except Niobe's
alone.  She was brave from excess of grief.  The sisters stood in
garments of mourning over the biers of their dead brothers.  One
fell, struck by an arrow, and died on the corpse she was
bewailing.  Another, attempting to console her mother, suddenly
ceased to speak, and sank lifeless to the earth.  A third tried
to escape by flight, a fourth by concealment, another stood
trembling, uncertain what course to take.  Six were now dead, and
only one remained, whom the mother held clasped in her arms, and
covered as it were with her whole body.

"Spare me one, and that the youngest!  Oh, spare me one of so
many?!" she cried; and while she spoke, that one fell dead.
Desolate she sat, among sons, daughters, husband, all dead, and
seemed torpid with grief.  The breeze moved not her hair, nor
color was on her cheek, her eyes glared fixed and immovable,
there was no sign of life about her.  Her very tongue clave to
the roof of her mouth, and her veins ceased to convey the tide of
life.  Her neck bent not, her arms made no gesture, her foot no
step.  She was changed to stone, within and without.  Yet tears
continued to flow; and, borne on a whirlwind to her native
mountain, she still remains, a mass of rock, from which a
trickling stream flows, the tribute of her never-ending grief.

The story of Niobe has furnished Byron with a fine illustration
of the fallen condition of modern Rome:

"The Niobe of nations!  There she stands,
Childless and crownless in her voiceless woe;
An empty urn within her withered hands,
Whose holy dust was scattered long ago;
The Scipios' tomb contains no ashes now;
The very sepulchres lie tenantless
Of their heroic dwellers; dost thou flow,
Old Tiber!  Through a marble wilderness?
Rise with thy yellow waves, and mantle her distress."
Childe Harold, IV.79

The slaughter of the children of Niobe by Apollo, alludes to the
Greek belief that pestilence and illness were sent by Apollo, and
one dying by sickness was said to be struck by Apollo's arrow.
It is to this that Morris alludes in the Earthly Paradise:

"While from the freshness of his blue abode,
Glad his death-bearing arrows to forget,
The broad sun blazed, nor scattered plagues as yet."

Our illustration of this story is a copy of a celebrated statue
in the imperial gallery of Florence.  It is the principal figure
of a group supposed to have been originally arranged in the
pediment of a temple.  The figure of the mother clasped by the
arm of her terrified child, is one of the most admired of the
ancient statues.  It ranks with the Laocoon and the Apollo among
the masterpieces of art.  The following is a translation of a
Greek epigram supposed to relate to this statue:

"To stone the gods have changed her, but in vain;
The sculptor's art has made her breathe again."

Tragic as is the story of Niobe we cannot forbear to smile at the
use Moore has made of it in Rhymes on the Road:

"'Twas in his carriage the sublime
Sir Richard Blackmore used to rhyme,
And, if the wits don't do him wrong,
'Twixt death and epics passed his time,
Scribbling and killing all day long;
Like Phoebus in his car at ease,
Now warbling forth a lofty song,
Now murdering the young Niobes."

Sir Richard Blackmore was a physician, and at the same time a
very prolific and very tasteless poet, whose works are now
forgotten, unless when recalled to mind by some wit like Moore
for the sake of a joke.


THE GRAEAE AND GORGONS

The Graeae were three sisters who were gray-haired from their
birth, whence their name.  The Gorgons were monstrous females
with huge teeth like those of swine, brazen claws, and snaky
hair.  They also were three in number, two of them immortal, but
the other, Medusa, mortal.  None of these beings make much figure
in mythology except Medusa, the Gorgon, whose story we shall next
advert to.  We mention them chiefly to introduce an ingenious
theory of some modern writers, namely, that the Gorgons and
Graeae were only personifications of the terrors of the sea, the
former denoting the STRONG billows of the wide open main, and the
latter the WHITE-crested waves that dash against the rocks of the
coast.  Their names in Greek signify the above epithets.


PERSEUS AND MEDUSA

Acrisius was the king who ruled in Argos.  To him had an oracle
declared that he should be slain by the child of his daughter
Danae.  Therefore the cruel king, thinking it better that Danae
should have no children than that he should be slain, ordered a
tower of brass to be made, and in this tower he confined his
daughter away from all men.

But who can withstand Jupiter?  He saw Danae, loved her, and
changing his form to a shower of gold, he shone into the
apartment of the captive girl.

Perseus was the child of Jupiter and Danae.  Acrisius, finding
that his precautions had come to nought, and yet hardly daring to
kill his own daughter and her young child, placed them both in a
chest and sent the chest floating on the sea.  It floated away
and was finally entangled in the net of Dicte, a fisherman in the
island of Seriphus.  He brought them to his house and treated
them kindly, and in the house of Dicte, Perseus grew up.  When
Perseus was grown up, Polydectes, king of that country, wishing
to send Perseus to his death, bade him go in quest of the head of
Medusa.  Medusa had once been a beautiful maiden, whose hair was
her chief glory, but as she dared to vie in beauty with Minerva,
the goddess deprived her of her charms and changed her beautiful
ringlets into hissing serpents.  She became a cruel monster of so
frightful an aspect that no living thing could behold her without
being turned into stone.  All around the cavern where she dwelt
might be seen the stony figures of men and beasts which had
chanced to catch a glimpse of her and had been petrified with the
sight.  Minerva and Mercury aided Perseus.  From Minerva, Perseus
borrowed her shield, and from Mercury the winged shoes and the
harpe or crooked sword.  After having flown all over the earth
Perseus espied in the bright shield the image of Medusa and her
two immortal sisters.  Flying down carefully he cut at her with
his harpe and severed her head.  Putting the trophy in his pouch
he flew away just as the two immortal sisters were awakened by
the hissings of their snaky locks.


PERSEUS AND ATLAS

After the slaughter of Medusa, Perseus, bearing with him the head
of the Gorgon, flew far and wide, over land and sea.  As night
came on, he reached the western limit of the earth, where the sun
goes down.  Here he would gladly have rested till morning.  It
was the realm of King Atlas, whose bulk surpassed that of all
other men.  He was rich in flocks and herds and had no neighbor
or rival to dispute his state.  But his chief pride was in his
gardens, whose fruit was of gold, hanging from golden branches,
half hid with golden leaves.  Perseus said to him, "I come as a
guest.  If you honor illustrious descent, I claim Jupiter for my
father; if mighty deeds, I plead the conquest of the Gorgon.  I
seek rest and food."  But Atlas remembered that an ancient
prophecy had warned him that a son of Jove should one day rob him
of his golden apples.  So he answered, "Begone! Or neither your
false claims of glory nor of parentage shall protect you;" and he
attempted to thrust him out.  Perseus, finding the giant too
strong for him, said, "Since you value my friendship so little,
deign to accept a present;" and turning his face away, he held up
the Gorgon's head.  Atlas, with all his bulk, was changed into
stone.  His beard and hair became forests, his arms and shoulders
cliffs, his head a summit, and his bones rocks.  Each part
increased in bulk till he became a mountain, and (such was the
pleasure of the gods) heaven with all its stars rests upon his
shoulders.

And all in vain was Atlas turned to a mountain, for the oracle
did not mean Perseus, but the hero Hercules, who should come long
afterwards to get the golden apples for his cousin Eurystheus.

Perseus, continuing his flight, arrived at the country of the
AEthiopians, of which Cepheus was king.  Cassiopeia, his queen,
proud of her beauty, had dared to compare herself to the Sea-
Nymphs, which roused their indignation to such a degree that they
sent a prodigious sea-monster to ravage the coast.  To appease
the deities, Cepheus was directed hy the oracle to expose his
daughter Andromeda to be devoured by the monster.  As Perseus
looked down from his aerial height he beheld the virgin chained
to a rock, and waiting the approach of the serpent.  She was so
pale and motionless that if it had not been for her flowing tears
and her hair that moved in the breeze, he would have taken her
for a marble statue.  He was so startled at the sight that he
almost forgot to wave his wings.  As he hovered over her he said,
"O virgin, undeserving of those chains, but rather of such as
bind fond lovers together, tell me, I beseech you, your name and
the name of your country, and why you are thus bound."  At first
she was silent from modesty, and, if she could, would have hid
her face with her hands; but when he repeated his questions, for
fear she might be thought guilty of some fault which she dared
not tell, she disclosed her name and that of her country, and her
mother's pride of beauty.  Before she had done speaking, a sound
was heard off upon the water, and the sea-monster appeared, with
his head raised above the surface, cleaving the waves with his
broad breast.  The virgin shrieked, the father and mother who had
now arrived at the scene, wretched both, but the mother more
justly so, stood by, not able to afford protection, but only to
pour forth lamentations and to embrace the victim.  Then spoke
Perseus: "There will be time enough for tears; this hour is all
we have for rescue.  My rank as the son of Jove and my renown as
the slayer of the Gorgon might make me acceptable as a suitor;
but I will try to win her by services rendered, if the gods will
only be propitious.  If she be rescued by my valor, I demand that
she be my reward."  The parents consent (how could they
hesitate?) And promise a royal dowry with her.

And now the monster was within the range of a stone thrown by a
skilful slinger, when with a sudden bound the youth soared into
the air.  As an eagle, when from his lofty flight he sees a
serpent basking in the sun, pounces upon him and seizes him by
the neck to prevent him from turning his head round and using his
fangs, so the youth darted down upon the back of the monster and
plunged his sword into its shoulder.  Irritated by the wound the
monster raised himself into the air, then plunged into the depth;
then, like a wild boar surrounded by a pack of barking dogs,
turned swiftly from side to side, while the youth eluded its
attacks by means of his wings.  Wherever he can find a passage
for his sword between the scales he makes a wound, piercing now
the side, now the flank, as it slopes towards the tail.  The
brute spouts from his nostrils water mixed with blood.  The wings
of the hero are wet with it, and he dares no longer trust to
them.   Alighting on a rock which rose above the waves, and
holding on by a projecting fragment, as the monster floated near
he gave him a death-stroke.  The people who had gathered on the
shore shouted so that the hills re-echoed to the sound.  The
parents, transported with joy, embraced their future son-in-law,
calling him their deliverer and the savior of their house, and
the virgin, both cause and reward of the contest, descended from
the rock.

Cassiopeia was an Aethiopian, and consequently, in spite of her
boasted beauty, black; at least so Milton seems to have thought,
who alludes to this story in his Penseroso, where he addresses
Melancholy as the

"------- goddess, sage and holy,
Whose saintly visage is too bright
To hit the sense of human sight,
And, therefore, to our weaker view
O'erlaid with black, staid Wisdom's hue.
Black, but such as in esteem
Prince Memnon's sister might beseem,
Or that starred Aethiop queen that strove
To set her beauty's praise above
The Sea-nymphs, and their powers offended."

Cassiopeia is called "the starred Aethiop queen," because after
her death she was placed among the stars, forming the
constellation of that name.  Though she attained this honor, yet
the Sea-Nymphs, her old enemies, prevailed so far as to cause her
to be placed in that part of the heaven near the pole, where
every night she is half the time held with her head downward, to
give her a lesson of humility.

"Prince Memnon" was the son of Aurora and Tithonus, of whom we
shall hear later.


THE WEDDING FEAST

The joyful parents, with Perseus and Andromeda, repaired to the
palace, where a banquet was spread for them, and all was joy and
festivity.  But suddenly a noise was heard of war-like clamor,
and Phineus, the betrothed of the virgin, with a party of his
adherents, burst in, demanding the maiden as his own.  It was in
vain that Cepheus remonstrated,   "You should have claimed her
when she lay bound to the rock, the monster's victim.  The
sentence of the gods dooming her to such a fate dissolved all
engagements, as death itself would have done.:" Phineus made no
reply, but hurled his javelin at Perseus, but it missed its mark
and fell harmless.  Perseus would have thrown his in turn, but
the cowardly assailant ran and took shelter behind the altar.
But his act was a signal for an onset by his band upon the guests
of Cepheus.  They defended themselves and a general conflict
ensued, the old king retreating from the scene after fruitless
expostulations, calling the gods to witness that he was guiltless
of this outrage on the rights of hospitality.

Perseus and his friends maintained for some time the unequal
contest; but the numbers of the assailants were too great for
them, and destruction seemed inevitable, when a sudden thought
struck Perseus: "I will make my enemy defend me."  Then, with a
loud voice he exclaimed, :If I have any friend here let him turn
away his eyes!" and held aloft the Gorgon's head.  "Seek not to
frighten us with your jugglery," said Thescelus, and raised his
javelin in act to throw, and became stone in the very attitude.
Ampyx was about to plunge his sword into the body of a prostrate
foe, but his arm stiffened and he could neither thrust forward
nor withdraw it.  Another, in the midst of a vociferous
challenge, stopped, his mouth open, but no sound issuing.  One of
Perseus's friends, Aconteus, caught sight of the Gorgon and
stiffened like the rest.  Astyages struck him with his sword, but
instead of wounding, it recoiled with a ringing noise.

Phineus beheld this dreadful result of his unjust aggression, and
felt confounded.  He called aloud to his friends, but got no
answer; he touched them and found them stone.  Falling on his
knees and stretching out his hands to Perseus, but turning his
head away, he begged for mercy.  "Take all," said he, "give me
but my life."  "Base coward," said Perseus, "thus much I will
grant you; no weapon shall touch you; moreover you shall be
preserved in my house as a memorial of these events." So saying,
he held the Gorgon's head to the side where Phineus was looking,
and in the very form in which he knelt, with his hands
outstretched and face averted, he became fixed immovably, a mass
of stone!

The following allusion to Perseus is from Milman's Samor:

"As 'mid the fabled Libyan bridal stood
Perseus in stern tranquillity of wrath,
Half stood, half floated on his ankle-plumes
Out-swelling, while the bright face on his shield
Looked into stone the raging fray; so rose,
But with no magic arms, wearing alone
Th' appalling and control of his firm look,
The Briton Samor; at his rising awe
Went abroad, and the riotous hall was mute."

Then Perseus returned to Seriphus to King Polydectes and to his
mother Danae and the fisherman Dicte.  He marched up the tyrant's
hall, where Polydectes and his guests were feasting.  "Have you
the head of Medusa?" exclaimed Polydectes.  "Here it is,"
answered Perseus, and showed it to the king and to his guests.

The ancient prophecy which Acrisius had so much feared at last
came to pass.  For, as Perseus was passing through the country of
Larissa, he entered into competition with the youths of the
country at the game of hurling the discus.  King Acrisius was
among the spectators.  The youths of Larissa threw first, and
then Perseus.  His discus went far beyond the others, and, seized
by a breeze from the sea, fell upon the foot of Acrisius.  The
old king swooned with pain, and was carried away from the place
only to die.  Perseus, who had heard the story of his birth and
parentage from Danae, when he learned who Acrisius was, filled
with remorse and sorrow, went to the oracle at Delphi, and there
was purified from the guilt of homicide.

Perseus gave the head of Medusa to Minerva, who had aided him so
well to obtain it.  Minerva took the head of her once beautiful
rival and placed it in the middle of her Aegis.

Milton, in his Comus, thus alludes to the Aegis:

"What was that snaky-headed Gorgon-shield
That wise Minerva wore, unconquered virgin,
Wherewith she freezed her foes to congealed stone,
But rigid looks of chaste austerity,
And noble grace that dashed brute violence
With sudden adoration and blank awe!"

Armstrong, the poet of the Art of Preserving Health, thus
describes the effect of frost upon the waters:

"Now blows the surly North and chills throughout
the stiffening regions, while by stronger charms
Than Circe e'er or fell Medea brewed,
Each brook that wont to prattle to its banks
Lies all bestilled and wedged betwixt its banks,
Nor moves the withered reeds. . . .
The surges baited by the fierce Northeast,
Tossing with fretful spleen their angry heads,
E'en in the foam of all their madness struck
To monumental ice.

                                                            *         *         *         *         *

Such execution,
So stern, so sudden, wrought the grisly aspect
Of terrible Medusa,
When wandering through the woods she turned to stone
Their savage tenants; just as the foaming lion
Sprang furious on his prey, her speedier power
Outran his haste,
And fixed in that fierce attitude he stands
Like Rage in marble!"
Imitations of Shakespeare

Of Atlas there is another story, which I like better than the one
told.  He was one of the Titans who warred against Jupiter like
Typhoeus, Briareus, and others.  After their defeat by the king
of gods and men, Atlas was condemned to stand in the far western
part of the earth, by the Pillars of Hercules, and to hold on his
shoulders the weight of heaven and the stars.

The story runs that Perseus, flying by, asked and obtained rest
and food.  The next morning he asked what he could do to reward
Atlas for his kindness.  The best that giant could think of was
that Perseus should show him the snaky head of Medusa, that he
might be turned to stone and be at rest from his heavy load.


Chapter X
Monsters.   Giants.   Sphinx.   Pegasus and the Chimaera.
Centaurs.   Griffin.   Pygmies

Monsters, in the language of mythology, were beings of unnatural
proportions or parts, usually regarded with terror, as possessing
immense strength and ferocity, which they employed for the injury
and annoyance of men.  Some of them were supposed to combine the
members of different animals; such were the Sphinx and the
Chimaera; and to these all the terrible qualities of wild beasts
were attributed, together with human sagacity and faculties.
Others, as the giants, differed from men chiefly in their size;
and in this particular we must recognize a wide distinction among
them.  The human giants, if so they may be called, such as the
Cyclopes, Antaeus, Orion, and others, must be supposed not to be
altogether disproportioned to human beings, for they mingled in
love and strife with them.  But the superhuman giants, who warred
with the gods, were of vastly larger dimensions.  Tityus, we are
told, when stretched on the plain, covered nine acres, and
Enceladus required the whole of Mount AEtna to be laid upon him
to keep him down.

We have already spoken of the war which the giants waged against
the gods, and of its result.  While this war lasted the giants
proved a formidable enemy.  Some of them, like Briareus, had a
hundred arms; others, like Typhon, breathed out fire.  At one
time they put the gods to such fear that they fled into Egypt,
and hid themselves under various forms.  Jupiter took the form of
a ram, whence he was afterwards worshipped in Egypt as the god
Ammon, with curved horns.  Apollo became a crow, Bacchus a goat,
Diana a cat, Juno a cow, Venus a fish, Mercury a bird.  At
another time the giants attempted to climb up into heaven, and
for that purpose took up the mountain Ossa and piled it on
Pelion.  They were at last subdued by thunderbolts, which Minerva
invented, and taught Vulcan and his Cyclopes to make for Jupiter.


THE SPHINX

Laius, king of Thebes, was warned by an oracle that there was
danger to his throne and life if his new-born son should be
suffered to grow up.  He therefore committed the child to the
care of a herdsman, with orders to destroy him; but the herdsman,
moved to pity, yet not daring entirely to disobey, tied up the
child by the feet, and left him hanging to the branch of a tree.
Here the infant was found by a herdsman of Polybus, king of
Corinth, who was pasturing his flock upon Mount Cithaeron.
Polybus and Merope, his wife, adopted the child, whom they called
OEdipus, or Swollen-foot, for they had no children themselves,
and in Corinth OEdipus grew up.  But as OEdipus was at Delphi,
the oracle prophesied to him that he should kill his father and
marry his own mother.  Fighting against Fate, OEdipus resolved to
leave Corinth and his parents, for he thought that Polybus and
Merope were meant by the oracle.

Soon afterwards, Laius being on his way to Delphi, accompanied
only by one attendant, met in a narrow road a young man also
driving in a chariot.  On his refusal to leave the way at their
command, the attendant killed one of his horses, and the
stranger, filled with rage, slew both Laius and his attendant.
The young man was OEdipus, who thus unknowingly became the slayer
of his own father.

Shortly after this event the city of Thebes was afflicted with a
monster which infested the high-road.  It was called the Sphinx.
It had the body of a lion, and the upper part of a woman.  It lay
crouched on the top of a rock, and stopped all travellers who
came that way, proposing to them a riddle, with the condition
that those who could solve it should pass safe, but those who
failed should be killed.  Not one had yet succeeded in solving
it, and all had been slain.  OEdipus was not daunted by these
alarming accounts, but boldly advanced to the trial.  The Sphinx
asked him, "What animal is that which in the morning goes on four
feet, at noon on two, and in the evening upon three?"  OEdipus
replied, "Man, who in childhood creeps on hands and knees, in
manhood walks erect, and in old age with the aid of a staff."
The Sphinx was so mortified at the solving of her riddle that she
cast herself down from the rock and perished.

The gratitude of the people for their deliverance was so great
that they made OEdipus their king, giving him in marriage their
queen Jocasta.  OEdipus, ignorant of his parentage, had already
become the slayer of his father; in marrying the queen he became
the husband of his mother.  These horrors remained undiscovered,
till at length Thebes was afflicted with famine and pestilence,
and the oracle being consulted, the double crime of OEdipus came
to light.  Jocasta put an end to her own life, and OEdipus,
seized with madness, tore out his eyes, and wandered away from
Thebes, dreaded and abandoned hy all except his daughters, who
faithfully adhered to him; till after a tedious period of
miserable wandering, he found the termination of his wretched
life.


PEGASUS AND THE CHIMAERA

When Perseus cut off Medusa's head, the blood sinking into the
earth produced the winged horse Pegasus.  Minerva caught and
tamed him, and presented him to the Muses.  The fountain
Hippocrene, on the Muses' mountain Helicon, was opened by a kick
from his hoof.

The Chimaera was a fearful monster, breathing fire.  The fore
part of its body was a compound of the lion and the goat, and the
hind part a dragon's.  It made great havoc in Lycia, so that the
king Iobates sought for some hero to destroy it.  At that time
there arrived at his court a gallant young warrior, whose name
was Bellerophon.  He brought letters from Proetus, the son-in-law
of Iobates, recommending Bellerophon in the warmest terms as an
unconquerable hero, but added at the close a request to his
father-in-law to put him to death.  The reason was that Proetus
was jealous of him, suspecting that his wife Antea looked with
too much admiration on the young warrior.  From this instance of
Bellerophon being unconsciously the bearer of his own death-
warrant, the expression "Bellerophontic letters" arose, to
describe any species of communication which a person is made the
bearer of, containing matter prejudicial to himself.

Iobates, on perusing the letters, was puzzled what to do, not
willing to violate the claims of hospitality, yet wishing to
oblige his son-in-law.  A lucky thought occurred to him, to send
Bellerophon to combat with the Chimaera.  Bellerophon accepted
the proposal, but before proceeding to the combat consulted the
soothsayer Polyidus, who advised him to procure if possible the
horse Pegasus for the conflict.  For this purpose he directed him
to pass the night in the temple of Minerva.  He did so, and as he
slept Minerva came to him and gave him a golden bridle.  When he
awoke the bridle remained in his hand.  Minerva also showed him
Pegasus drinking at the well of Pirene, and at sight of the
bridle, the winged steed came willingly and suffered himself to
be taken.  Bellerophon mounting, rose with him into the air, and
soon found the Chimaera, and gained an easy victory over the
monster.

After the conquest of the Chimaera, Bellerophon was exposed to
further trials and labors by his unfriendly host, but by the aid
of Pegasus he triumphed in them all; till at length Iobates,
seeing that the hero was a special favorite of the gods, gave him
his daughter in marriage and made him his successor on the
throne.  At last Bellerophon by his pride and presumption drew
upon himself the anger of the gods; it is said he even attempted
to fly up into heaven on his winged steed; but Jupiter sent a
gadfly which stung Pegasus and made him throw his rider, who
became lame and blind in consequence.  After this Bellerophon
wandered lonely through the Aleian field, avoiding the paths of
men, and died miserably.

Milton alludes to Bellerophon in the beginning o the seventh book
of Paradise Lost:

"Descend from Heaven, Urania, by that name
If rightly thou art called, whose voice divine
Following above the Olympian hill I soar,
Above the flight of Pegasean wing,
Up-led by thee,
Into the Heaven of Heavens I have presumed,
An earthly guest, and drawn empyreal air,
(Thy tempering;) with like safety guided down
Return me to my native element;
Lest from this flying steed unreined, (as once
Bellerophon, though from a lower sphere,)
Dismounted on the Aleian field I fall,
Erroneous there to wander, and forlorn."

Young in his Night Thoughts, speaking of the skeptic, says,

"He whose blind thought futurity denies,
Unconscious bears, Bellerophon, like thee
His own indictment; he condemns himself,
Who reads his bosom reads immortal life,
Or nature there, imposing on her sons,
Has written fables; man was made a lie."
Vol. II.1,12.

Pegasus, being the horse of the Muses, has always been at the
service of the poets.  Schiller tells a pretty story of his
having been sold by a needy poet, and put to the cart and the
plough.  He was not fit for such service, and his clownish master
could make nothing of him.  But a youth stepped forth and asked
leave to try him.  As soon as he was seated on his back, the
horse, which had appeared at first vicious, and afterwards
spirit-broken, rose kingly, a spirit, a god; unfolded the
splendor of his wings and soared towards heaven.  Our own poet
Longfellow also records an adventure of this famous steed in his
Pegasus in Pound.

Shakespeare alludes to Pegasus in Henry IV, where Vernon
describes Prince Henry:

"I saw young Harry, with his beaver on,
His cuishes on his thighs, gallantly armed,
Rise from the ground like feathered Mercury,
And vaulted with such ease into his seat,
As if an angel dropped down from the clouds,
To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus,
And witch the world with noble horsemanship."


THE CENTAURS

The Greeks loved to people their woods and hills with strange
wild people,   half man, half beast.  Such were the Satyrs   men
with goats' legs.  But nobler and better were the Centaurs,   men
to the waist, while the rest was the form of a horse.  The
ancients were too fond of a horse to consider the union of his
nature with man's as forming any very degraded compound, and
accordingly the Centaur is the only one of the fancied monsters
of antiquity to which any good traits are assigned.  The Centaurs
were admitted to the companionship of man, and at the marriage of
Pirithous with Hippodamia, they were among the guests.  At the
feast, Eurytion, one of the Centaurs, becoming intoxicated with
the wine, attempted to offer violence to the bride; the other
Centaurs followed his example, and a dreadful conflict arose in
which several of them were slain.  This is the celebrated battle
of the Lapithae and Centaurs, a favorite subject with the
sculptors and poets of antiquity.

But all the Centaurs were not like the rude guests of Pirithous.
Chiron was instructed by Apollo and Diana, and was renowned for
his skill in hunting, medicine, music, and the art of prophecy.
The most distinguished heroes of Grecian story were his pupils.
Among the rest the infant Aesculapius was intrusted to his
charge, by Apollo, his father.  When the sage returned to his
home bearing the infant, his daughter Ocyroe came forth to meet
him, and at sight of the child burst forth into a prophetic
strain (for she was a prophetess), foretelling the glory that he
was to achieve.  Aesculapius, when grown up, became a renowned
physician, and even in one instance succeeded in restoring the
dead to life.  Pluto resented this, and Jupiter, at his request,
struck the bold physician with lightning and killed him, but
after his death received him into the number of the gods.

Chiron was the wisest and justest of all the Centaurs, and at his
death Jupiter placed him among the stars as the constellation
Sagittarius.


THE PYGMIES

The Pygmies were a nation of dwarfs, so called from a Greek word
which means the cubit (a cubit was a measure of about thirteen
inches), which was said to be the height of these people.  They
lived near the sources of the Nile, or according to others, in
India.   Homer tells us that the cranes used to migrate every
winter to the Pygmies' country, and their appearance was the
signal of bloody warfare to the puny inhabitants, who had to take
up arms to defend their cornfields against the rapacious
strangers.  The Pygmies and their enemies the cranes form the
subject of several works of art.

Later writers tell of an army of Pygmies which finding Hercules
asleep made preparations to attack him, as if they were about to
attack a city.  But the hero awaking laughed at the little
warriors, wrapped some of them up in his lion's-skin, and carried
them to Eurystheus.

Milton used the Pygmies for a simile, Paradise Lost, Book I:

"----------like that Pygmaean race
Beyond the Indian mount, or fairy elves
Whose midnight revels by a forest side,
Or fountain, some belated peasant sees,
(Or dreams he sees), while overhead the moon
Sits artibress, and nearer to the earth
Wheels her pale course; they on their mirth and dance
Intent, with jocund music charm his ear.
At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds."


THE GRIFFIN, OR GRYPHON

THE Griffin is a monster with the body of a lion, the head and
wings of an eagle, and back covered with feathers.  Like birds it
builds its nest, and instead of an egg lays an agate therein.  It
has long claws and talons of such a size that the people of that
country make them into drinking-cups.  India was assigned as the
native country of the Griffins.  They found gold in the mountains
and built their nests of it, for which reason their nests were
very tempting to the hunters, and they were forced to keep
vigilant guard over them.  Their instinct led them to know where
buried treasures lay, and they did their best to keep plunderers
at a distance.  The Arimaspians, among whom the Griffins
flourished, were a one-eyed people of Scythia.

Milton borrows a simile from the Griffins, Paradise Lost, Book
II.:

"As when a Gryphon through the wilderness,
With winged course, o'er hill and moory dale,
Pursues the Arimaspian who by stealth
Hath from his wakeful custody purloined
His guarded gold."


Chapter XI
The Golden Fleece.   Medea.   The Calydonian Hunt

In very ancient times there lived in Thessaly a king and queen
named Athamas and Nephele.  They had two children, a boy and a
girl.  After a time Athamas grew indifferent to his wife, put her
away, and took another.  Nephele suspected danger to her children
from the influence of the step-mother, and took measures to send
them out of her reach.  Mercury assisted her, and gave her a ram,
with a GOLDEN FLEECE, on which she set the two children, trusting
that the ram would convey them to a place of safety.  The ram
sprung into the air with the children on his back, taking his
course to the east, till when crossing the strait that divides
Europe and Asia, the girl, whose name was Helle, fell from his
back into the sea, which from her was called the Hellespont,
now the Dardanelles.  The ram continued his career till he
reached the kingdom of Colchis, on the eastern shore of the Black
Sea, where he safely landed the boy Phyrxus, who was hospitably
received by AEetes, the king of the country.  Phryxus sacrificed
the ram to Jupiter, and gave the golden fleece to AEetes, who
placed it in a consecrated grove, under the care of a sleepless
dragon.

There was another kingdom in Thessaly near to that of Athamas,
and ruled over by a relative of his.  The king AEson, being tired
of the cares of government, surrendered his crown to his brother
Pelias, on condition that he should hold it only during the
minority of Jason, the son of AEson.  When Jason was grown up and
came to demand the crown from his uncle, Pelias pretended to be
willing to yield it, but at the same time suggested to the young
man the glorious adventure of going in quest of the golden
fleece, which it was well known was in the kingdom of Colchis,
and was, as Pelias pretended, the rightful property of their
family.  Jason was pleased with the thought, and forthwith made
preparations for the expedition.  At that time the only species
of navigation known to the Greeks consisted of small boats or
canoes hollowed out from trunks of trees, so that when Jason
employed Argus to build him a vessel capable of containing fifty
men, it was considered a gigantic undertaking.  It was
accomplished, however, and the vessel was named the Argo, from
the name of the builder.  Jason sent his invitation to all the
adventurous young men of Greece, and soon found himself at the
head of a band of bold youths, many of whom afterwards were
renowned among the heroes and demigods of Greece.  Hercules,
Theseus, Orpheus, and Nestor were among them.  They are called
the Argonauts, from the name of their vessel.

The Argo with her crew of heroes left the shores of Thessaly and
having touched at the Island of Lemnos, thence crossed to Mysia
and thence to Thrace.  Here they found the sage Phineus, and from
him received instruction as to their future course.  It seems the
entrance of the Euxine Sea was impeded by two small rocky
islands, which floated on the surface, and in their tossings and
heavings occasionally came together, crushing and grinding to
atoms any object that might be caught between them.  They were
called the Symplegades, or Clashing Islands.  Phineus instructed
the Argonauts how to pass this dangerous strait.  When they
reached the islands they let go a dove, which took her way
between the rocks, and passed in safety, only losing some
feathers of her tail.  Jason and his men seized the favorable
moment of the rebound, plied their oars with vigor, and passed
safe through, though the islands closed behind them, and actually
grazed their stern.  They now rowed along the shore till they
arrived at the eastern end of the sea, and landed at the kingdom
of Colchis.

Jason made known his message to the Colchian king, AEetes, who
consented to give up the golden fleece if Jason would yoke to the
plough two fire-breathing bulls with brazen feet, and sow the
teeth of the dragon, which Cadmus had slain, and from which it
was well known that a crop of armed men would spring up, who
would turn their weapons against their producer.  Jason accepted
the conditions, and a time was set for making the experiment.
Previously, however, he found means to plead his cause to Medea,
daughter of the king.  He promised her marriage, and as they
stood before the altar of Hecate, called the goddess to witness
his oath.  Medea yielded   and by her aid, for she was a potent
sorceress, he was furnished with a charm, by which he could
encounter safely the breath of the fire-breathing bulls and the
weapons of the armed men.

At the time appointed, the people assembled at the grove of Mars,
and the king assumed his royal seat, while the multitude covered
the hill-sides.  The brazen-footed bulls rushed in, breathing
fire from their nostrils, that burned up the herbage as they
passed.  The sound was like the roar of a furnace, and the smoke
like that of water upon quick-lime.  Jason advanced boldly to
meet them.  His friends, the chosen heroes of Greece, trembled to
behold him.  Regardless of the burning breath, he soothed their
rage with his voice, patted their necks with fearless hands, and
adroitly slipped over them the yoke, and compelled them to drag
the plough.  The Colchians were amazed; the Greeks shouted for
joy.  Jason next proceeded to sow the dragon's teeth and plough
them in.  And soon the crop of armed men sprang up, and wonderful
to relate! no sooner had they reached the surface than they began
to brandish their weapons and rush upon Jason.  The Greeks
trembled for their hero, and even she who had provided him a way
of safety and taught him how to use it, Medea herself, grew pale
with fear.  Jason for a time kept his assailants at bay with his
sword and shield, till finding their numbers overwhelming, he
resorted to the charm which Medea had taught him, seized a stone
and threw it in the midst of his foes.  They immediately turned
their arms against one another, and soon there was not one of the
dragon's brood left alive.  The Greeks embraced their hero, and
Medea, if she dared, would have embraced him too.

Then AEetes promised the next day to give them the fleece, and
the Greeks went joyfully down to the Argo with the hero Jason in
their midst.  But that night Medea came down to Jason, and bade
him make haste and follow her, for that her father proposed the
next morning to attack the Argonauts and to destroy their ship.
They went together to the grove of Mars, where the golden fleece
hung guarded by the dreadful dragon, who glared at the hero and
his conductor with his great round eyes that never slept.  But
Medea was prepared, and began her magic songs and spells, and
sprinkled over him a sleeping potion which she had prepared by
her art.  At the smell he relaxed his rage, stood for a moment
motionless, then shut those great round eyes, that had never been
known to shut before, and turned over on his side, fast asleep.
Jason seized the fleece, and with his friends and Medea
accompanying, hastened to their vessel, before AEETES, the king,
could arrest their departure, and made the best of their way back
to Thessaly, where they arrived safe, and Jason delivered the
fleece to Pelias, and dedicated the Argo to Neptune.  What became
of the fleece afterwards we do not know, but perhaps it was
found, after all, like many other golden prizes, not worth the
trouble it had cost to procure it.

This is one of those mythological tales, says a modern writer, in
which there is reason to believe that a substratum of truth
exists, though overlaid by a mass of fiction.  It probably was
the first important maritime expedition, and like the first
attempts of the kind of all nations, as we know from history, was
probably of a half-piratical character.  If rich spoils were the
result, it was enough to give rise to the idea of the golden
fleece.

Another suggestion of a learned mythologist, Bryant, is that it
is a corrupt tradition of the story of Noah and the ark.  The
name Argo seems to countenance this, and the incident of the dove
is another confirmation.

Pope, in his Ode on St. Cecelia's Day, thus celebrates the
launching of the ship Argo, and the power of the music of
Orpheus, whom he calls the Thracian:

"So when the first bold vessel dared the seas,
High on the stern the Thracian raised his strain,
While Argo saw her kindred trees
Descend from Pelion to the main.
Transported demigods stood round,
And men grew heroes at the sound."

In Dyer's poem of The Fleece there is an account of the ship Argo
and her crew, which gives a good picture of this primitive
maritime adventure:

"From every region of Aegea's shore
The brave assembled; those illustrious twins,
Castor and Pollux; Orpheus, tuneful bard;
Zetes and Calais, as the wind in speed;
Strong Hercules and many a chief renowned.
On deep Iolcos' sandy shore they thronged,
Gleaming in armor, ardent of exploits;
And soon, the laurel cord and the huge stone
Uplifting to the deck, unmoored the bark;
Whose keel of wondrous length the skilful hand
Of Argus fashioned for the proud attempt;
And in the extended keel a lofty mast
Upraised, and sails full swelling; to the chiefs
Unwonted objects.  Now first, now they learned
Their bolder steerage over ocean wave,
Led by the golden stars, as Chiron's art
Had marked the sphere celestial."

Hercules left the expedition at Mysia, for Hylas, a youth beloved
by him, having gone for water, was laid hold of and kept by the
nymphs of the spring, who were fascinated by his beauty.
Hercules went in quest of the lad, and while he was absent the
Argo put to sea and left him.  Moore, in one of his songs, makes
a beautiful allusion to this incident:

"When Hylas was sent with his urn to the fount,
Through fields full of light and with heart full of play,
Light rambled the boy over meadow and mount,
And neglected his task for the flowers in the way.

"Thus many like me, who in youth should have tasted
The fountain that runs by Philosophy's shrine,
Their time with the flowers on the margin have wasted,
And left their light urns all as empty as mine."

But Hercules, as some say, went onward to Colchis by land, and
there performed many mighty deeds, and wiped away the stain of
cowardice which might have clung to him.


MEDEA AND AESON

Amid the rejoicings for the recovery of the golden Fleece, Jason
felt that one thing was wanting, the presence of AESON, his
father, who was prevented by his age and infirmities from taking
part in them.  Jason said to Medea, "My wife, I would that your
arts, whose power I have seen so mighty for my aid, could do me
one further service, and take some years from my life to add them
to my father's."  Medea replied, "Not at such a cost shall it be
done, but if my art avails me, his life shall be lengthened
without abridging yours."  The next full moon she issued forth
alone, while all creatures slept; not a breath stirred the
foliage, and all was still.  To the stars she addressed her
incantations, and to the moon; to Hecate (Hecate was a mysterious
divinity sometimes identified with Diana and sometimes with
Proserpine.  As Diana represents the moonlight splendor of night,
so Hecate represents its darkness and terrors.  She was the
goddess of sorcery and witchcraft, and was believed to wander by
night along the earth, seen only by the dogs whose barking told
her approach.), the goddess of the underworld, and to Tellus, the
goddess of the earth, by whose power plants potent for
enchantments are produced.  She invoked the gods of the woods and
caverns, of mountains and valleys, of lakes and rivers, of winds
and vapors.  While she spoke the stars shone brighter, and
presently a chariot descended through the air, drawn by flying
serpents.  She ascended it, and, borne aloft, made her way to
distant regions, where potent plants grew which she knew how to
select for her purpose.  Nine nights she employed in her search,
and during that time came not within the doors of her palace nor
under any roof, and shunned all intercourse with mortals.

She next erected two altars, the one to Hecate, the other to
Hebe, the goddess of youth, and sacrificed a black sheep, pouring
libations of milk and wine.  She implored Pluto and his stolen
bride that they would not hasten to take the old man's life.
Then she directed that AESON should be led forth, and having
thrown him into a deep sleep by a charm, had him laid on a bed of
herbs, like one dead.  Jason and all others were kept away from
the place, that no profane eyes might look upon her mysteries.
Then, with streaming hair, she thrice moved round the altars,
dipped flaming twigs in the blood, and laid them thereon to burn.
Meanwhile the caldron with its contents was got ready.  In it she
put magic herbs, with seeds and flowers of acrid juice, stones
from the distant East, and sand from the shore of all-surrounding
ocean; hoar frost, gathered by moonlight, a screech-owl's head
and wings, and the entrails of a wolf.  She added fragments of
the shells of tortoises, and the liver of stags,   animals
tenacious of life,   and the head and beak of a crow, that
outlives nine generations of men.  These, with many other things
without a name, she boiled together for her purposed work,
stirring them up with a dry olive branch; and behold, the branch
when taken out instantly became green, and before long was
covered with leaves and a plentiful growth of young olives; and
as the liquor boiled and bubbled, and sometimes ran over, the
grass, wherever the sprinklings fell, shot forth with a verdure
like that of spring.

Seeing that all was ready, Medea cut the throat of the old man
and let out all his blood, and poured into his mouth and into his
wound the juices of her caldron.  As soon as he had completely
imbibed them, his hair and beard laid by their whiteness and
assumed the blackness of youth; his paleness and emaciation were
gone; his veins were full of blood, his limbs of vigor and
robustness.  AESON is amazed at himself, and remembers that such
as he now is he was in his youthful days, forty years before.

Medea used her arts here for a good purpose, but not so in
another instance, where she made them the instruments of revenge.
Pelias, our readers will recollect, was the usurping uncle of
Jason, and had kept him out of his kingdom.  Yet he must have had
some good qualities, for his daughters loved him, and when they
saw what Medea had done for AESON, they wished her to do the same
for their father.  Medea pretended to consent, and prepared her
caldron as before.  At her request an old sheep was brought and
plunged into the caldron.  Very soon a bleating was heard in the
kettle, and, when the cover was removed, a lamb jumped forth and
ran frisking away into the meadow.  The daughters of Pelias saw
the experiment with delight, and appointed a time for their
father to undergo the same operation.  But Medea prepared her
caldron for him in a very different way.  She put in only water
and a few simple herbs.  In the night she with the sisters
entered the bed-chamber of the old king, while he and his guards
slept soundly under the influence of a spell cast upon them by
Medea.  The daughters stood by the bedside with their weapons
drawn, but hesitated to strike, till Medea chid their
irresolution.  Then, turning away their faces and giving random
blows, they smote him with their weapons.  He, starting from his
sleep, cried out, "My daughters, what are you doing?  Will you
kill your father?:" Their hearts failed them, and the weapons
fell from their hands, but Medea struck him a fatal blow, and
prevented his saying more.

Then they placed him in the caldron, and Medea hastened to depart
in her serpent-drawn chariot before they discovered her
treachery, for their vengeance would have been terrible.  She
escaped, however, but had little enjoyment of the fruits of her
crime.  Jason, for whom she had done so much, wishing to marry
Creusa, princess of Corinth, put away Medea.  She, enraged at his
ingratitude, called on the gods for vengeance, sent a poisoned
robe as a gift to the bride, and then killing her own children,
and setting fire to the palace, mounted her serpent-drawn chariot
and fled to Athens, where she married King AEgeus, the father of
Theseus; and we shall meet her again when we come to the
adventures of that hero.

The incantations of Medea will remind the reader of those of the
witches in Macbeth.  The following lines are those which seem
most strikingly to recall the ancient model:

"Round about the caldron go;
In the poisoned entrails throw.
                         *    *    *    *    *    *
Fillet of a fenny snake
In the caldron boil and bake;
Eye of newt and toe of frog,
Wool of bat and tongue of dog.
Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting,
Lizard's leg and howlet's wing:
                              *    *    *    *    *
Maw of ravening salt-sea shark,
Root of hemlock digged in the dark."
Macbeth, Act IV., Scene 1

And again:

Macbeth.   What is't you do?
Witches.   A deed without a name.

There is another story of Medea almost too revolting for record
even of a sorceress, a class of persons to whom both ancient and
modern poets have been accustomed to attribute every degree of
atrocity.  In her flight from Colchis she had taken her young
brother Absyrtus with her.  Finding the pursuing vessels of
AEETES gaining upon the Argonauts, she caused the lad to be
killed and his limbs to be strewn over the sea.  AEETES on
reaching the place found these sorrowful traces of his murdered
son; but while he tarried to collect the scattered fragments and
bestow upon them an honorable interment, the Argonauts escaped.

In the poems of Campbell will be found a translation of one of
the choruses of the tragedy of Medea, where the poet Euripides
has taken advantage of the occasion to pay a glowing tribute to
Athens, his native city.  It begins thus:

"Oh, haggard queen!  To Athens dost thou guide
Thy glowing chariot, steeped in kindred gore;
Or seek to hide thy damned parricide
Where Peace and Justice dwell for evermore?"


THE CALYDONIAN HUNT.   MELEAGER AND ATALANTA

The search for the Golden Fleece was undertaken by Jason, aided
by heroes from all Greece, or Hellas as it was then called.  It
was the first of their common undertakings which made the Greeks
feel that they were in truth one nation, though split up into
many small kingdoms.  Another of their great gatherings was for
the Calydonian Hunt, and another, the greatest and most famous of
all, for the Trojan War.

The hero of the quest for the golden Fleece was Jason.  With the
other heroes of the Greeks, he was present at the Calydonian
Hunt.  But the chief hero was Meleager, the son of OEneus, king
of Calydon, and Althea, his queen.

Althea, when her son was born, beheld the three Destinies, who,
as they spun their fatal thread, foretold that the life of the
child should last no longer than a brand then burning upon the
hearth.  Althea seized and quenched the brand, and carefully
preserved it for years, while Meleager grew to boyhood, youth,
and manhood.  It chanced, then, that OEneus, as he offered
sacrifices to the gods, omitted to pay due honors to Diana, and
she, indignant at the neglect, sent a wild boar of enormous size
to lay waste the files of Calydon.  Its eyes shone with blood and
fire, its bristles stood like threatening spears, its tusks were
like those of Indian elephants.  The growing corn was trampled,
the vines and olive trees laid waste, the flocks and herds were
driven in wild confusion by the slaughtering foe.  All common aid
seemed vain; but Meleager called on the heroes of Greece to join
in a bold hunt for the ravenous monster.  Theseus and his friend
Pirithous, Jason, Peleus afterwards the father of Achilles,
Telamon the father of Ajax, Nestor, then a youth, but who in his
age bore arms with Achilles and Ajax in the Trojan war,   these
and many more joined in the enterprise.  With them came Atalanta,
the daughter of Iasius, king of Arcadia.  A buckle of polished
gold confined her vest, an ivory quiver hung on her left
shoulder, and her left hand bore the bow.  Her face blent
feminine beauty with the best graces of martial youth.  Meleager
saw and loved.

But now already they were near the monster's lair.  They
stretched strong nets from tree to tree; they uncoupled their
dogs, they tried to find the footprints of their quarry in the
grass.  From the wood was a descent to marshy ground.  Here the
boar, as he lay among the reeds, heard the shouts of his
pursuers, and rushed forth against them.  One and another is
thrown down and slain.  Jason throws his spear with a prayer to
Diana for success; and the favoring goddess allows the weapon to
touch, but not to wound, removing the steel point of the spear
even in its flight.  Nestor, assailed, seeks and finds safety in
the branches of a tree.  Telamon rushes on, but stumbling at a
projecting root, falls prone.  But an arrow from Atalanta at
length for the first time tastes the monster's blood.  It is a
slight wound, but Meleager sees and joyfully proclaims it.
Anceus, excited to envy by the praise given to a female, loudly
proclaims his own valor, and defies alike the boar and the
goddess who had sent it; but as he rushes on, the infuriated
beast lays him low with a mortal wound.  Theseus throws his
lance, but it is turned aside by a projecting bough.  The dart of
Jason misses its object, and kills instead one of their own dogs.
But Meleager, after one unsuccessful stroke, drives his spear
into the monsters side, then rushes on and despatches him with
repeated blows.

Then rose a shout from those around; they congratulated the
conqueror, crowding to touch his hand.  He, placing his foot upon
the slain boar, turned to Atalanta and bestowed on her the head
and the rough hide which were the trophies of his success.  But
at this, envy excited the rest to strife.  Phlexippus and Toxeus,
the uncles of Meleager and Althea's brothers, beyond the rest
opposed the gift, and snatched from the maiden the trophy she had
received.  Meleager, kindling with rage at the wrong done to
himself, and still more at the insult offered to her whom he
loved, forgot the claims of kindred, and plunged his sword into
the offenders' hearts.

As Althea bore gifts of thankfulness to the temples for the
victory of her son, the bodies of her murdered brothers met her
sight.  She shrieks, and beats her breast, and hastens to change
the garments of rejoicing for those of mourning.  But when the
author of the deed is known, grief gives way to the stern desire
of vengeance on her son.  The fatal brand, which once she rescued
from the flames, the brand which the Destinies had linked with
Meleager's life, she brings forth, and commands a fire to be
prepared.  Then four times she essays to place the brand upon the
pile; four times draws back, shuddering at the thought of
bringing destruction on her son.  The feelings of the mother and
the sister contend within her.  Now she is pale at the thought of
the purposed deed, now flushed again with anger at the act of her
son.  As a vessel, driven in one direction by the wind, and in
the opposite by the tide, the mind of Althea hangs suspended in
uncertainty.  But now the sister prevails above the mother, and
she begins as she holds the fatal wood: "Turn, ye Furies,
goddesses of punishment!  Turn to behold the sacrifice I bring!
Crime must atone for crime.  Shall OEneus rejoice in his victor
son, while the house of Thestius (Thestius was father of Toxeus,
Phlexippus and Althea) is desolate?  But, alas! To what deed am I
borne along?  Brothers, forgive a mother's weakness!  My hand
fails me.  He deserves death, but not that I should destroy him.
But shall he then live, and triumph, and reign over Calydon,
while you, my brothers, wander unavenged among the shades?  No!
Thou has lived by my gift; die, now, for thine own crime.  Return
the life which twice I gave thee, first at thy birth, again when
I snatched this brand from the flames.  O that thou hadst then
died!  Alas!  Evil is the conquest; but, brothers, ye have
conquered."  And, turning away her face, she threw the fatal wood
upon the burning pile.

It gave, or seemed to give, a deadly groan.  Meleager, absent and
unknowing of the cause, felt a sudden pang.  He burns and only by
courageous pride conquers the pain which destroys him.  He mourns
only that he perishes by a bloodless and unhonored death.  With
his last breath he calls upon his aged father, his brother, and
his fond sisters, upon his beloved Atalanta, and upon his mother,
the unknown cause of his fate.  The flames increase, and with
them the pain of the hero.  Now both subside; now both are
quenched.  The brand is ashes and the life of Meleager is
breathed forth to the wandering winds.

Althea, when the deed was done, laid violent hands upon herself.
The sisters of Meleager mourned their brother with uncontrollable
grief; till Diana, pitying the sorrows of the house that once had
aroused her anger, turned them into birds.


ATALANTA

The innocent cause of so much sorrow was a maiden whose face you
might truly say was boyish for a girl, yet too girlish for a boy.
Her fortune had been told, and it was to this effect: "Atalanta,
do not marry; marriage will be your ruin."  Terrified by this
oracle, she fled the society of men, and devoted herself to the
sports of the chase.  To all suitors (for she had many) she
imposed a condition which was generally effectual in relieving
her of their persecutions:   "I will be the prize of him who
shall conquer me in the race; but death must be the penalty of
all who try and fail."  In spite of this hard condition some
would try.  Hippomenes was to be judge of the race.  "Can it be
possible that any will be so rash as to risk so much for a wife?"
said he.  But when he saw her lay aside her robe for the race, he
changed his mind, and said, "Pardon me, youths, I knew not the
prize you were competing for." As he surveyed them he wished them
all to be beaten, and swelled with envy of any one that seemed at
all likely to win.  While such were his thoughts, the virgin
darted forward.  As she ran, she looked more beautiful than ever.
The breezes seemed to give wings to her feet; her hair flew over
her shoulders, and the gay fringe of her garment fluttered behind
her.  A ruddy hue tinged the whiteness of her skin, such as a
crimson curtain casts on a marble wall.  All her competitors were
distanced, and were put to death without mercy.  Hippomenes, not
daunted by this result, fixing his eyes on the virgin, said, "Why
boast of beating those laggards?  I offer myself for the
contest."  Atalanta looked at him with a pitying countenance, and
hardly knew whether she would rather conquer him or not.  "What
god can tempt one so young and handsome to throw himself away?  I
pity him, not for his beauty (yet he is beautiful), but for his
youth.  I wish he would give up the race, or if he will be so
mad, I hope he may outrun me."  While she hesitates, revolving
these thoughts, the spectators grow impatient for the race, and
her father prompts her to prepare.  Then Hippomenes addressed a
prayer to Venus; "Help me, Venus, for you have led me on" Venus
heard, and was propitious.

In the garden of her temple, in her own island of Cyprus, is a
tree with yellow leaves and yellow branches, and golden fruit.
Hence Venus gathered three golden apples, and, unseen by all
else, gave them to Hippomenes, and told him how to use them.  The
signal is given; each starts from the goal, and skims over the
sand.  So light their tread, you would almost have thought they
might run over the river surface or over the waving grain without
sinking.  The cries of the spectators cheered on Hippomenes:
"Now, now do your best!  Haste, haste!  You gain on her!  Relax
not!  One more effort!"  It was doubtful whether the youth or the
maiden heard these cries with the greater pleasure.  But his
breath began to fail him, his throat was dry, the goal yet far
off.  At that moment he threw down one of the golden apples.  The
virgin was all amazement.  She stopped to pick it up.  Hippomenes
shot ahead.  Shouts burst forth from all sides.  She redoubled
her efforts, and soon overtook him.  Again he threw an apple.
She stopped again, but again came up with him.  The goal was
near; one chance only remained.  "Now, goddess," said he,
"prosper your gift!" and threw the last apple off at one side.
She looked at it, and hesitated; Venus impelled her to turn aside
for it.  She did so, and was vanquished.  The youth carried off
his prize.

But the lovers were so full of their own happiness that they
forgot to pay due honor to Venus; and the goddess was provoked at
their ingratitude.  She caused them to give offence to Cybele.
That powerful goddess was not to be insulted with impunity.  She
took from them their human form and turned them into animals of
characters resembling their own: of the huntress-heroine,
triumphing in the blood of her lovers, she made a lioness, and of
her lord and master a lion, and yoked them to her ear, there they
are still to be seen in all representations, in statuary or
painting, of the goddess Cybele.

Cybele is the Latin name of the goddess called by the Greeks Rhea
and Ops.  She was the wife of Cronos and mother of Zeus.  In
works of art, she exhibits the matronly air which distinguishes
Juno and Ceres.  Sometimes she is veiled, and seated on a throne
with lions at her side, at other times riding in a chariot drawn
by lions.  She sometimes wears a mural crown, that is, a crown
whose rim is carved in the form of towers and battlements.  Her
priests were called Corybantes.

Byron in describing the city of Venice, which is built on a low
island in the Adriatic Sea, borrows an illustration from Cybele:


"She looks a sea-Cybele fresh from ocean,
Rising with her tiara of proud towers
At airy distance, with majestic motion,
A ruler of the waters and their powers."
Childe Harold, IV

In Moore's Rhymes on the Road, the poet, speaking of Alpine
scenery, alludes to the story of Atalanta and Hippomenes, thus:

"Even here, in this region of wonders, I find
That light-footed Fancy leaves Truth far behind,
Or at least, like Hippomenes, turns her astray
By the golden illusions he flings in her way."


Chapter XII
Hercules.   Hebe and Ganymede

Hercules (in Greek, Heracles) was the son of Jupiter and Alemena.
As Juno was always hostile to the offspring of her husband by
mortal mothers, she declared war against Hercules from his birth.
She sent two serpents to destroy him as he lay in his cradle, but
the precocious infant strangled them with his own hands.  (On
this account the infant Hercules was made the type of infant
America, by Dr. Franklin, and the French artists whom he employed
in the American Revolution.  Horatio Greenough has placed a bas-
relief of the Infant Hercules on the pedestal of his statue of
Washington, which stands in front of the Capitol.)  He was
however by the arts of Juno rendered subject to his cousin
Eurystheus and compelled to perform all his commands.  Eurystheus
enjoined upon him a succession of desperate adventures, which are
called the twelve "Labors of Hercules."  The first was the fight
with the Nemean lion.  The valley of Nemea was infested by a
terrible lion.  Eurystheus ordered Hercules to bring him the skin
of this monster.  After using in vain his club and arrows against
the lion, Hercules strangled the animal with his hands.  He
returned carrying the dead lion on his shoulders; but Eurystheus
was so frightened at the sight of it and at this proof of the
prodigious strength of the hero, that he ordered him to deliver
the account of his exploits in future outside the town.

His next labor was to slaughter the Hydra.  This monster ravaged
the country of Argos, and dwelt in a swamp near the well of
Amymone, of which the story is that when the country was
suffering from drought, Neptune, who loved her, had permitted her
to touch the rock with his trident, and a spring of three outlets
burst forth.  Here the Hydra took up his position, and Hercules
was sent to destroy him.  The Hydra had nine heads, of which the
middle one was immortal.  Hercules struck off its head with his
club, but in the place of the head knocked off, two new ones grew
forth each time.  At length with the assistance of his faithful
servant Iolaus, he burned away the heads of the Hydra, and buried
the ninth or immortal one under a huge rock.

Another labor was the cleaning of the Augean stables.  Augeas,
king of Elis, had a herd of three thousand oxen, whose stalls had
not been cleansed for thirty years.  Hercules brought the rivers
Alpheus and Peneus through them, and cleansed them thoroughly in
one day.

His next labor was of a more delicate kind.  Admeta, the daughter
of Eurystheus, longed to obtain the girdle of the queen of the
Amazons, and Eurystheus ordered Hercules to go and get it.  The
Amazons were a nation of women.  They were very warlike and held
several flourishing cities.  It was their custom to bring up only
the female children; the boys were either sent away to the
neighboring nations or put to death.  Hercules was accompanied by
a number of volunteers, and after various adventures at last
reached the country of the Amazons.  Hippolyta, the queen,
received him kindly, and consented to yield him her girdle; but
Juno, taking the form of an Amazon, went among the other Amazons
and persuaded them that the strangers were carrying off their
queen.  The Amazons instantly armed and came in great numbers
down to the ship.  Hercules, thinking that Hippolyta had acted
treacherously, slew her, and taking her girdle, made sail
homewards.

Another task enjoined him was to bring to Eurystheus the oxen of
Geryon, a monster with three bodies who dwelt in the island
Erytheia (the red), so called because it lay at the west, under
the rays of the setting sun.  This description is thought to
apply to Spain, of which Geryon was said to be king.  After
traversing various countries, Hercules reached at length the
frontiers of Libya and Europe, where he raised the two mountains
of Calpe and Abyla, as monuments of his progress, or according to
another account rent one mountain into two and left half on each
side, forming the Straits of Gibraltar, the two mountains being
called the Pillars of Hercules.  The oxen were guarded by the
giant Eurytion and his two-headed dog, but Hercules killed the
giant and his dog and brought away the oxen in safety to
Eurystheus.

The most difficult labor of all was bringing the golden apples of
the Hesperides, for Hercules did not know where to find them.
These were the apples which Juno had received at her wedding from
the goddess of the Earth, and which she had intrusted to the
keeping of the daughters of Hesperis, assisted by a watchful
dragon.  After various adventures Hercules arrived at Mount Atlas
in Africa.  Atlas was one of the Titans who had warred against
the gods, and after they were subdued, Atlas was condemned to
bear on his shoulders the weight of the heavens.  He was the
father of the Hesperides, and Hercules thought, might, if any one
could, find the apples and bring them to him.  But how to send
Atlas away from his post, or bear up the heavens while he was
gone?  Hercules took the burden on his own shoulders, and sent
Atlas to seek the apples.  He returned with them, and though
somewhat reluctantly, took his burden upon his shoulders again,
and let Hercules return with the apples to Eurystheus.  (Hercules
was a descendant of Perseus.  Perseus changed Atlas to stone.
How could Hercules take his place?  This is only one of the many
anachronisms found in ancient mythology.)

Milton in his Comus makes the Hesperides the daughters of
Hesperus, and nieces of Atlas:

"----- amidst the gardens fair
Of Hesperus and his daughters three,
That sing about the golden tree."

The poets, led by the analogy of the lovely appearance of the
western sky at sunset, viewed the west as a region of brightness
and glory.  Hence they placed in it the Isles of the blest, the
ruddy isle Erytheia, on which the bright oxen of Geryon were
pastured, and the isle of the Hesperides.  The apples are
supposed by some to be the oranges of Spain, of which the Greeks
had heard some obscure accounts.

A celebrated exploit of Hercules was his victory over Antaeus.
Antaeus, the son of Terra (the Earth) was a mighty giant and
wrestler, whose strength was invincible so long as he remained in
contact with his mother Earth.  He compelled all strangers who
came to his country to wrestle with him, on condition that if
conquered (as they all were), they should be put to death.
Hercules encountered him, and finding that it was of no avail to
throw him, for he always rose with renewed strength from every
fall, he lifted him up from the earth and strangled him in the
air.

Cacus was a huge giant, who inhabited a cave on Mount Aventine
(one of the seven hills of Rome), and plundered the surrounding
country.  When Hercules was driving home the oxen of Geryon,
Cacus stole part of the cattle, while the hero slept.  That their
foot-prints might not serve to show where they had been driven,
he dragged them backward by their tails to his cave; so their
tracks all seemed to show that they had gone in the opposite
direction.  Hercules was deceived by this stratagem, and would
have failed to find his oxen, if it had not happened that in
driving the remainder of the herd past the cave where the stolen
ones were concealed, those within began to low, and were thus
discovered.  Cacus was slain by Hercules.

The last exploit we shall record was bringing Cerberus from the
lower world.  Hercules descended into Hades, accompanied by
Mercury and Minerva.  He obtained permission from Pluto to carry
Cerberus to the upper air, provided he could do it without the
use of weapons; and in spite of the monster's struggling he
seized him, held him fast, and carried him to Eurystheus, and
afterwards brought him back again.  When he was in Hades he
obtained the liberty of Theseus, his admirer and imitator, who
had been detained a prisoner there for an unsuccessful attempt to
carry off Proserpine.

Hercules in a fit of madness killed his friend Iphitus and was
condemned for this offence to become the slave of Queen Omphale
for three years.  While in this service the hero's nature seemed
changed.  He lived effeminately, wearing at times the dress of a
woman, and spinning wool with the handmaidens of Omphale, while
the queen wore his lion's skin.  When this service was ended he
married Dejanira and lived in peace with her three years.  On one
occasion as he was travelling with his wife, they came to a
river, across which the Centaur Nessus carried travellers for a
stated fee.  Hercules himself forded the river, but gave Dejanira
to Nessus to be carried across.  Nessus attempted to run away
with her, but Hercules heard her cries, and shot an arrow into
the heart of Nessus.  The dying Centaur told Dejanira to take a
portion of his blood and keep it, as it might be used as a charm
to preserve the love of her husband.

Dejanira did so, and before long fancied she had occasion to use
it.  Hercules in one of his conquests had taken prisoner a fair
maiden, named Iole, of whom he seemed more fond than Dejanira
approved.  When Hercules was about to offer sacrifices to the
gods in honor of his victory, he sent to his wife for a white
robe to use on the occasion.  Dejanira, thinking it a good
opportunity to try her love-spell, steeped the garment in the
blood of Nessus.  We are to suppose she took care to wash out all
traces of it, but the magic power remained, and as soon as the
garment became warm on the body of Hercules, the poison
penetrated into all his limbs and caused him the most intense
agony.  In his frenzy he seized Lichas, who had brought him the
fatal robe, and hurled him into the sea.  He wrenched off the
garment, but it stuck to his flesh, and with it he tore away
whole pieces of his body.  In this state he embarked on board a
ship and was conveyed home.  Dejanira on seeing what she had
unwittingly done, hung herself.  Hercules, prepared to die,
ascended Mount OEta, where he built a funeral pile of trees, gave
his bow and arrows to Philoctetes, and laid himself down on the
pile, his head resting on his club, and his lion's skin spread
over him.  With a countenance as serene as if he were taking his
place at a festal board, he commanded Philoctetes to apply the
torch.  The flames spread apace and soon invested the whole mass.

Milton thus alludes to the frenzy of Hercules:

"As when Alcides (Alcides, a name of Hercules; the word means
"descendant of Alcaeus"), from OEchalia crowned
With conquest, felt the envenomed robe, and tore,
Through pain, up by the roots Thessalian pines
And Lichas from the top of OEta threw
Into the Euboic Sea."

The gods themselves felt troubled at seeing the champion of the
earth so brought to his end; but Jupiter with cheerful
countenance thus addressed them; "I am pleased to see your
concern, my princes, and am gratified to perceive that I am the
ruler of a loyal people, and that my son enjoys your favor.  For
although your interest in him arises from his noble deeds, yet it
is not the less gratifying to me.  But now I say to you, Fear
not.  He who conquered all else is not to be conquered by those
flames which you see blazing on Mount OEta.  Only his mother's
share in him can perish; what he derived from me is immortal.  I
shall take him, dead to earth, to the heavenly shores, and I
require of you all to receive him kindly.  If any of you feel
grieved at his attaining this honor, yet no one can deny that he
has deserved it."  The gods all gave their assent; Juno only
heard the closing words with some displeasure that she should be
so particularly pointed at, yet not enough to make her regret the
determination of her husband.  So when the flames had consumed
the mother's share of Hercules, the diviner part, instead of
being injured thereby, seemed to start forth with new vigor, to
assume a more lofty port and a more awful dignity.  Jupiter
enveloped him in a cloud, and took him up in a four-horse chariot
to dwell among the stars.  As he took his place in heaven, Atlas
felt the added weight.

Juno, now reconciled to him, gave him her daughter Hebe in
marriage.

The poet Schiller, in one of his pieces called the Ideal and
Life, illustrates the contrast between the practical and the
imaginative in some beautiful stanzas, of which the last two may
be thus translated:

"Deep degraded to a coward's slave,
Endless contests bore Alcides brave,
Through the thorny path of suffering led;
Slew the Hydra, crushed the lion's might,
Threw himself, to bring his friend to light,
Living, in the skiff that bears the dead.
All the torments, every toil of earth
Juno's hatred on him could impose,
Well he bore them, from his fated birth
To life's grandly mournful close.
Till the god, the earthly part forsaken,
>From the man in flames asunder taken,
Drank the heavenly ether's purer breath.
Joyous in the new unwonted lightness,
Soared he upwards to celestial brightness,
Earth's dark heavy burden lost in death.
High Olympus gives harmonious greeting
To the hall where reigns his sire adored;
Youth's bright goddess, with a blush at meeting,
Gives the nectar to her lord."
S. G. Bulfinch


HEBE AND GANYMEDE

Hebe, the daughter of Juno, and goddess of youth, was cupbearer
to the gods.  The usual story is, that she resigned her office on
becoming the wife of Hercules.  But there is another statement
which our countryman Crawford, the sculptor, has adopted in his
group of Hebe and Ganymede, now in the gallery of the Boston
Athenaeum.  According to this, Hebe was dismissed from her office
in consequence of a fall which she met with one day when in
attendance on the gods.  Her successor was Ganymede, a Trojan boy
whom Jupiter, in the disguise of an eagle, seized and carried off
from the midst of his playfellows on Mount Ida, bore up to
heaven, and installed in the vacant place.

Tennyson, in his Palace of Art, describes among the decorations
on the walls, a picture representing this legend:

"There, too, flushed Ganymede his rosy thigh
Half buried in the eagle's down,
Sole as a flying star shot through the sky
Above the pillared town."

And in Shelley's Prometheus, Jupiter calls to his cup-bearer
thus:

"Pour forth heaven's wine, Idaean Ganymede,
And let it fill the Daedal cups like fire."

The beautiful legend of the Choice of Hercules may be found in
the Tatler, No. 97.  The same story is told in the Memorabilia of
Xenophon.


Chapter XIII
Theseus.   Daedalus.   Castor and Pollux

Theseus was the son of AEgeus, king of Athens, and of Aethra,
daughter of the king of Troezene.  He was brought up at Troezene,
and, when arrived at manhood, was to proceed to Athens and
present himself to his father.  AEgeus, on parting from Aethra,
before the birth of his son, placed his sword and shoes under a
large stone, and directed her to send his son to him when he
became strong enough to roll away the stone and take them from
under it.  When she thought the time had come, his mother led
Theseus to the stone, and he removed it with ease, and took the
sword and shoes.   As the roads were infested with robbers, his
grandfather pressed him earnestly to take the shorter and safer
way to his father's country, by sea; but the youth, feeling in
himself the spirit and the soul of a hero, and eager to signalize
himself like Hercules, with whose fame all Greece then rang, by
destroying the evil-doers and monsters that oppressed the
country, determined on the more perilous and adventurous journey
by land.

His first day's journey brought him to Epidaurus, where dwelt a
man named Periphetes, a son of Vulcan.  This ferocious savage
always went armed with a club of iron, and all travellers stood
in terror of his violence.  When he saw Theseus approach, he
assailed him, but speedily fell beneath the blows of the young
hero, who took possession of his club, and bore it ever
afterwards as a memorial of his first victory.

Several similar contests with the petty tyrants and marauders of
the country followed, in all of which Theseus was victorious.
One of these evil-doers was called Procrustes, or the Stretcher.
He had an iron bedstead, on which he used to tie all travellers
who fell into his hands.  If they were shorter than the bed, he
stretched their limbs to make them fit it; if they were longer
than the bed, he lopped off a portion.  Theseus served him as he
had served others.

Having overcome all the perils of the road, Theseus at length
reached Athens, where new dangers awaited him.  Medea, the
sorceress, who had fled from Corinth after her separation from
Jason, had become the wife of AEgeus, the father of Theseus.
Knowing by her arts who he was, and fearing the loss of her
influence with her husband, if Theseus should be acknowledged as
his son, she filled the mind of AEgeus with suspicions of the
young stranger, and induced him to present him a cup of poison;
but at the moment when Theseus stepped forward to take it, the
sight of the sword which he wore discovered to his father who he
was, and prevented the fatal draught.  Medea, detected in her
arts, fled once more from deserved punishment, and arrived in
Asia, where the country afterwards called Media received its name
from her.  Theseus was acknowledged by his father, and declared
his successor.

The Athenians were at that time in deep affliction, on account of
the tribute which they were forced to pay to Minos, king of
Crete.  This tribute consisted of seven youths and seven maidens,
who were sent every year to be devoured by the Minotaur, a
monster with a bull's body and a human head.  It was exceedingly
strong and fierce, and was kept in a labyrinth constructed by
Daedalus, so artfully contrived that whoever was enclosed in it
could by no means find his way out unassisted.  Here the Minotaur
roamed, and was fed with human victims.

Theseus resolved to deliver his countrymen from this calamity, or
to die in the attempt.  Accordingly, when the time of sending off
the tribute came, and the youths and maidens were, according to
custom, drawn by lot to be sent, he offered himself as one of the
victims, in spite of the entreaties of his father.  The ship
departed under black sails, as usual, which Theseus promised his
father to change for white, in case of his returning victorious.
When they arrived in Crete, the youths and maidens were exhibited
before Minos; and Ariadne, the daughter of the king, being
present, became deeply enamored of Theseus, by whom her love was
readily returned.  She furnished him with a sword, with which to
encounter the Minotaur, and with a clew of thread by which he
might find his way out of the labyrinth.  He was successful, slew
the Minotaur, escaped from the labyrinth, and taking Ariadne as
the companion of his way, with his rescued companions sailed for
Athens.  On their way they stopped at the island of Naxos, where
Theseus abandoned Ariadne, leaving her asleep.  For Minerva had
appeared to Theseus in a dream, and warned him that Ariadne was
destined to be the wife of Bacchus, the wine-god.  (One of the
finest pieces of sculpture in Italy, the recumbent Ariadne of the
Vatican, represents this incident.  A copy is in the Athenaeum
gallery, Boston.  The celebrated statue of Ariadne, by Danneker,
represents her as riding on the tiger of Bacchus, at a somewhat
later period of her story.)

On approaching the coast of Attica, Theseus, intent on Ariadne,
forgot the signal appointed by his father, and neglected to raise
the white sails, and the old king, thinking his son had perished,
put an end to his own life.  Theseus thus became king of Athens.

One of the most celebrated of the adventures of Theseus is his
expedition against the Amazons.  He assailed them before they had
recovered from the attack of Hercules, and carried off their
queen, Antiope.  The Amazons in their turn invaded the country of
Athens and penetrated into the city itself; and the final battle
in which Theseus overcame them was fought in the very midst of
the city.  This battle was one of the favorite subjects of the
ancient sculptors, and is commemorated in several works of art
that are still extant.

The friendship between Theseus and Pirithous was of a most
intimate nature, yet it originated in the midst of arms.
Pirithous had made an irruption into the plain of Marathon, and
carried off the herds of the king of Athens.  Theseus went to
repel the plunderers.  The moment Pirithous beheld him, he was
seized with admiration; he stretched out his hand as a token of
peace, and cried, "Be judge thyself,   what satisfaction dost
thou require?"  "Thy friendship," replied the Athenian, and they
swore inviolable fidelity.  Their deeds corresponded to their
professions, and they ever continued true brothers in arms.  Each
of them aspired to espouse a daughter of Jupiter.  Theseus fixed
his choice on Helen, then but a child, afterwards so celebrated
as the cause of the Trojan war, and with the aid of his friend he
carried her off.  Pirithous aspired to the wife of the monarch of
Erebus; and Theseus, though aware of the danger, accompanied the
ambitious lover in his descent to the underworld.  But Pluto
seized and set them on an enchanted rock at his palace gate,
where they remained till Hercules arrived and liberated Theseus,
leaving Pirithous to his fate.

After the death of Antiope, Theseus married Phaedra, daughter of
Minos, king of Crete.  Phaedra saw in Hippolytus, the son of
Theseus, a youth endowed with all the graces and virtues of his
father, and of an age corresponding to her own.  She loved him,
but he repulsed her advances, and her love was changed to hate.
She used her influence over her infatuated husband to cause him
to be jealous of his son, and he imprecated the vengeance of
Neptune upon him.  As Hippolytus was one day driving his chariot
along the shore, a sea-monster raised himself above the waters,
and frightened the horses so that they ran away and dashed the
chariot to pieces.  Hippolytus was killed, but by Diana's
assistance Aesculapius restored him to life.  Diana removed
Hippolytus from the power of his deluded father and false
stepmother, and placed him in Italy under the protection of the
nymph Egeria.

Theseus at length lost the favor of his people, and retired to
the court of Lycomedes, king of Scyros, who at first received him
kindly, but afterwards treacherously slew him.  In a later age
the Athenian general Cimon discovered the place where his remains
were laid, and caused them to be removed to Athens, where they
were deposited in a temple called the Theseum, erected in honor
of the hero.

The queen of the Amazons whom Theseus espoused is by some called
Hippolyta.  That is the name she bears in Shakespeare's Midsummer
Night's Dream,   the subject of which is the festivities
attending the nuptials of Theseus and Hippolyta.

Mrs. Hemans has a poem on the ancient Greek tradition that the
"Shade of Theseus" appeared strengthening his countrymen at the
battle of Marathon.

Mr. Lewis Morris has a beautiful poem on Helen, in the Epic of
Hades.  In these lines Helen describes how she was seized by
Theseus and his friend:

----------"There came a night
When I lay longing for my love, and knew
Sudden the clang of hoofs, the broken doors,
The clash of swords, the shouts, the groans, the stain
Of red upon the marble, the fixed gaze
Of dead and dying eyes,   that was the time
When first I looked on death,   and when I woke
>From my deep swoon, I felt the night air cool
Upon my brow, and the cold stars look down,
As swift we galloped o'er the darkling plain
And saw the chill sea-glimpses slowly wake,
With arms unknown around me.  When the dawn
Broke swift, we panted on the pathless steeps,
And so by plain and mountain till we came
to Athens, ----------."

Theseus is a semi-historical personage.  It is recorded of him
that he united the several tribes by whom the territory of Attica
was then possessed into one state, of which Athens was the
capital.  In commemoration of this important event, he instituted
the festival of Panathenaea, in honor of Minerva, the patron
deity of Athens.  This festival differed from the other Grecian
games chiefly in two particulars.  It was peculiar to the
Athenians, and its chief feature was a solemn procession in which
the Peplus or sacred robe of Minerva was carried to the
Parthenon, and suspended before the statue of the goddess.  The
Peplus was covered with embroidery, worked by select virgins of
the noblest families in Athens.  The procession consisted of
persons of all ages and both sexes.  The old men carried olive-
branches in their hands, and the young men bore arms.  The young
women carried baskets on their heads, containing the sacred
utensils, cakes, and all things necessary for the sacrifices.
The procession formed the subject of the bas-reliefs by Phidias
which embellished the outside of the temple of the Parthenon.  A
considerable portion of these sculptures is now in the British
museum among those known as the "Elgin marbles."


OLYMPIC AND OTHER GAMES

We may mention here the other celebrated national games of the
Greeks.  The first and most distinguished were the Olympic,
founded, it was said , by Jupiter himself.  They were celebrated
at Olympia in Elis.  Vast numbers of spectators flocked to them
from every part of Greece, and from Asia, Africa, and Sicily.
They were repeated every fifth year in midsummer, and continued
five days.  They gave rise to the custom of reckoning time and
dating events by Olympiads.  The first Olympiad is generally
considered as corresponding with the year 776 B.C.  The Pythian
games were celebrated in the vicinity of Delphi, the Isthmian on
the Corinthian isthmus, the Nemean at Nemea, a city of Argolis.

The exercises in these games were of five sorts: running,
leaping, wrestling, throwing the quoit, and hurling the javelin,
or boxing.  Besides these exercises of bodily strength and
agility, there were contests in music, poetry, and eloquence.
Thus these games furnished poets, musicians, and authors the best
opportunities to present their productions to the public, and the
fame of the victors was diffused far and wide.


DAEDALUS

The labyrinth from which Theseus escaped by means of the clew of
Ariadne, was built by Daedalus, a most skilful artificer.  It was
an edifice with numberless winding passages and turnings opening
into one another, and seeming to have neither beginning nor end,
like the river Maender, which returns on itself, and flows now
onward, now backward, in its course to the sea.  Daedalus built
the labyrinth for King Minos, but afterwards lost the favor of
the king, and was shut up in a tower.  He contrived to make his
escape from his prison, but could not leave the island by sea, as
the king kept strict watch on all the vessels, and permitted none
to sail without being carefully searched.  "Minos may control the
land and sea,:" said Daedalus, "but not the regions of the air.
I will try that way."  So he set to work to fabricate wings for
himself and his young son Icarus.  He wrought feathers together
beginning with the smallest and adding larger, so as to form an
increasing surface.  The larger ones he secured with thread and
the smaller with wax, and gave the whole a gentle curvature like
the wings of a bird.  Icarus, the boy, stood and looked on,
sometimes running to gather up the feathers which the wind had
blown away, and then handling the wax and working it over with
his fingers, by his play impeding his father in his labors.  When
at last the work was done, the artist, waving his wings, found
himself buoyed upward and hung suspended, poising himself on the
beaten air.  He next equipped his son in the same manner, and
taught him how to fly, as a bird tempts her young ones from the
lofty nest into the air.  When all was prepared for flight, he
said, "Icarus, my son, I charge you to keep at a moderate height,
for if you fly too low the damp will clog your wings, and if too
high the heat will melt them.  Keep near me and you will be
safe."  While he gave him these instructions and fitted the wings
to his shoulders, the face of the father was wet with tears, and
his hands trembled.  He kissed the boy, not knowing that it was
for the last time.  Then rising on his wings he flew off,
encouraging him to follow, and looked back from his own flight to
see how his son managed his wings.  As they flew the ploughman
stopped his work to gaze, and the shepherd learned on his staff
and watched them, astonished at the sight, and thinking they were
gods who could thus cleave the air.

They passed Samos and Delos on the left and Lebynthos on the
right, when the boy, exulting in his career, began to leave the
guidance of his companion and soar upward as if to reach heaven.
The nearness of the blazing sun softened the wax which held the
feathers together, and they came off.  He fluttered with his
arms, but no feathers remained to hold the air.  While his mouth
uttered cries to his father, it was submerged in the blue waters
of the sea, which thenceforth was called by his name.  His father
cried, "Icarus, Icarus, where are you?" At last he saw the
feathers floating on the water, and bitterly lamenting his own
arts, he buried the body and called the land Icaria in memory of
his child.  Daedalus arrived safe in Sicily, where he built a
temple to Apollo, and hung up his wings, an offering to the god.

Daedalus was so proud of his achievements that he could not bear
the idea of a rival.  His sister had placed her son Perdix under
his charge to be taught the mechanical arts.  He was an apt
scholar and gave striking evidences of ingenuity.  Walking
on the seashore he picked up the spine of a fish.  Imitating it,
he took a piece of iron and notched it on the edge, and thus
invented the SAW.  He put two pieces of iron together, connecting
them at one end with a rivet, and sharpening the other ends, and
made a PAIR OF COMPASSES.  Daedalus was so envious of his
nephew's performances that he took an opportunity, when they were
together one day on the top of a high tower, to push him off.
But Minerva, who favors ingenuity, saw him falling, and arrested
his fate by changing him into a bird called after his name, the
Partridge.  This bird does not build his next in the trees, nor
take lofty flights, but nestles in the hedges, and mindful of his
fall, avoids high places.

The death of Icarus is told in the following lines by Darwin:

"---------- with melting wax and loosened strings
Sunk hapless Icarus on unfaithful wings;
Headlong he rushed through the affrighted air,
With limbs distorted and dishevelled hair;
His scattered plumage danced upon the wave,
And sorrowing Nereids decked his watery grave;
O'er his pale corse their pearly sea-flowers shed,
And strewed with crimson moss his marble bed;
Struck in their coral towers the passing bell,
And wide in ocean tolled his echoing knell."


CASTOR AND POLLUX

Castor and Pollux were the offspring of Leda and the Swan, under
which disguise Jupiter had concealed himself.  Leda gave birth to
an egg, from which sprang the twins.  Helen, so famous afterwards
as the cause of the Trojan war, was their sister.

When Theseus and his friend Pirithous had carried off Helen from
Sparta, the youthful heroes Castor and Pollux, with their
followers, hasted to her rescue.  Theseus was absent from Attica,
and the brothers were successful in recovering their sister.

Castor was famous for taming and managing horses, and Pollux for
skill in boxing.  They were united by the warmest affection, and
inseparable in all their enterprises.  They accompanied the
Argonautic expedition.  During the voyage a storm arose, and
Orpheus prayed to the Samothracian gods, and played on his harp,
whereupon the storm ceased and stars appeared on the heads of the
brothers.  From this incident, Castor and Pollux came afterwards
to be considered the patron deities of seamen and voyagers (One
of the ships in which St. Paul sailed was named the Castor and
Pollux.  See Acts xxviii.II.), and the lambent flames, which in
certain sates of the atmosphere play round the sails and masts of
vessels, were called by their names.

After the Argonautic expedition, we find Castor and Pollux
engaged in a war with Idas and Lynceus.  Castor was slain, and
Pollux, inconsolable for the loss of his brother, besought
Jupiter to be permitted to give his own life as a ransom for him.
Jupiter so far consented as to allow the two brothers to enjoy
the boon of life alternately, passing one day under the earth and
the next in the heavenly abodes.  According to another form of
the story, Jupiter rewarded the attachment of the brothers by
placing them among the stars as Gemini, the Twins.

They received divine honors under the name of Dioscuri (sons of
Jove).  They were believed to have appeared occasionally in later
times, taking part with one side or the other, in hard-fought
fields, and were said on such occasions to be mounted on
magnificent white steeds.  Thus, in the early history of Rome,
they are said to have assisted the Romans at the battle of Lake
Regillus, and after the victory a temple was erected in their
honor on the spot where they appeared.

Macaulay, in his Lays of Ancient Rome, thus alludes to the
legend:

"So like they were, no mortal
Might one from other know;
White as snow their armor was,
Their steeds were white as snow.
Never on earthly anvil
Did such rare armor gleam,
And never did such gallant steeds
Drink of an earthly stream.
                                        .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

"Back comes the chief in triumph
Who in the hour of fight
Hath seen the great Twin Brethren
In harness on his right.
Safe comes the ship to haven
Through billows and through gales,
If once the great Twin Brethren
Sit shining on the sails."

In the poem of Atalanta in Calydon Mr. Swinburne thus describes
the little Helen and Clytemnestra, the sisters of Castor and
Pollux:

MELEAGER

"Even such I saw their sisters, one swan white,
The little Helen, and less fair than she,
Fair Clytemnestra, grave as pasturing fawns,
Who feed and fear the arrow; but at whiles,
As one smitten with love or wrung with joy,
She laughs and lightens with her eyes, and then
Weeps; whereat Helen, having laughed, weeps too,
And the other chides her, and she being chid speaks naught,
But cheeks and lips and eyelids kisses her,
Laughing; so fare they, as in their blameless bud,
And full of unblown life, the blood of gods."

ALTHEA

"Sweet days before them, and good loves and lords,
And tender and temperate honors of the hearth;
Peace, and a perfect life and blameless bed"


Chapter XIV
Bacchus.   Ariadne

Bacchus was the son of Jupiter and Semele.  Juno, to gratify her
resentment against Semele, contrived a plan for her destruction.
Assuming the form of Beroe, her aged nurse, she insinuated doubts
whether it was indeed Jove himself who came as a lover.  Heaving
a sigh, she said, "I hope it will turn out so, but I can't help
being afraid.  People are not always what they pretend to be.  If
he is indeed Jove, make him give some proof of it.  Ask him to
come arrayed in all his splendors, such as he wears in heaven.
That will put the matter beyond a doubt."  Semele was persuaded
to try the experiment.  She asks a favor, without naming what it
is.  Jove gives his promise and confirms it with the irrevocable
oath, attesting the river Styx, terrible to the gods themselves.
Then she made know her request.  The god would have stopped her
as she spake, but she was too quick for him.  The words escaped,
and he could neither unsay his promise nor her request.  In deep
distress he left her and returned to the upper regions.  There he
clothed himself in his splendors, not putting on all his terrors,
as when he overthrew the giants, but what is known among the gods
as his lesser panoply.  Arrayed in this he entered the chamber of
Semele.  Her mortal frame could not endure the splendors of the
immortal radiance.  She was consumed to ashes.

Jove took the infant Bacchus and gave him in charge to the
Nysaean nymphs, who nourished his infancy and childhood, and for
their care were rewarded by Jupiter by being placed, as the
Hyades, among the stars.  When Bacchus grew up he discovered the
culture of the vine and the mode of extracting its precious
juice; but Juno struck him with madness, and drove him forth a
wanderer through various parts of the earth.  In Phrygia the
goddess Rhea cured him and taught him her religious rites, and he
set out on a progress through Asia teaching the people the
cultivation of the vine.  The most famous part of his wanderings
is his expedition to India, which is said to have lasted several
years.  Returning in triumph he undertook to introduce his
worship into Greece, but was opposed by some princes who dreaded
its introduction on account of the disorders and madness it
brought with it.

As he approached his native city Thebes, Pentheus the king, who
had no respect for the new worship, forbade its rites to be
performed.  But when it was known that Bacchus was advancing, men
and women, but chiefly the latter, young and old poured forth to
meet him and to join his triumphal march.

Mr. Longfellow in his Drinking Song thus describes the march of
Bacchus:

"Fauns with youthful Bacchus follow;
Ivy crowns that brow, supernal
As the forehead of Apollo,
And possessing youth eternal.

"Round about him fair Bacchantes,
Bearing cymbals, flutes and thyrses,
Wild from Naxian groves or Zante's
Vineyards, sing delirious verses."

It was in vain Pentheus remonstrated, commanded, and threatened.
"Go," said he to his attendants, "seize this vagabond leader of
the rout and bring him to me.  I will soon make him confess his
false claim of heavenly parentage and renounce his counterfeit
worship."  It was in vain his nearest friends and wisest
counselors remonstrated and begged him not to oppose the god.
Their remonstrances only made him more violent.

But now the attendants returned whom he had despatched to seize
Bacchus.  They had been driven away by the Bacchanals, but had
succeeded in taking one of them prisoner, whom, with his hands
tied behind him, they brought before the king.  Pentheus
beholding him, with wrathful countenance said, "Fellow!  You
shall speedily be put to death, that your fate may be a warning
to others; but though I grudge the delay of your punishment,
speak, tell us who you are, and what are these new rites you
presume to celebrate."

The prisoner unterrified responded, "My name is Acetes; my
country is Maeonia; my parents were poor people, who had no
fields or flocks to leave me, but they left me their fishing rods
and nets and their fisherman's trade.  This I followed for some
time, till growing weary of remaining in one place, I learned the
pilot's art and how to guide my course by the stars.  It happened
as I was sailing for Delos, we touched at the island of Dia and
went ashore.  Next morning I sent the men for fresh water and
myself mounted the hill to observe the wind; when my men returned
bringing with them a prize, as they thought, a boy of delicate
appearance, whom they had found asleep.  They judged he was a
noble youth, perhaps a king's son, and they might get a liberal
ransom for him.  I observed his dress, his walk, his face.  There
was something in them which I felt sure was more than mortal.  I
said to my men, 'What god there is concealed in that form I know
not, but some one there certainly is.  Pardon us, gentle deity,
for the violence we have done you, and give success to our
undertakings.'  Dictys, one of my best hands for climbing the
mast and coming down by the ropes, and Melanthus, my steersman,
and Epopeus the leader of the sailors' cry, one and all
exclaimed, 'Spare your prayers for us.'  So blind is the lust of
gain!  When they proceeded to put him on board I resisted them.
'This ship shall not be profaned by such impiety,' said I. 'I
have a greater share in her than any of you.'  But Lycabas, a
turbulent fellow, seized me by the throat and attempted to throw
me overboard, and I scarcely saved myself by clinging to the
ropes.  The rest approved the deed.

"Then Bacchus, for it was indeed he, as if shaking off his
drowsiness, exclaimed, 'What are you doing with me?  What is this
fighting about?  Who brought me here?  Where are you going to
carry me?'  One of them replied, 'fear nothing; tell us where you
wish to go and we will take you there.'  "Naxos is my home,' said
Bacchus; 'take me there and you shall be well rewarded.'  They
promised so to do, and told me to pilot the ship to Naxos.  Naxos
lay to the right, and I was trimming the sails to carry us there,
when some by signs and others by whispers signified to me their
will that I should sail in the opposite direction, and take the
boy to Egypt to sell him for a slave.  I was confounded and said,
'Let some one else pilot the ship;' withdrawing myself from any
further agency in their wickedness.  They cursed me, and one of
them exclaiming, 'Don't flatter yourself that we depend on you
for our safety,' took my place as pilot, and bore away from
Naxos.

"Then the god, pretending that he had just become aware of their
treachery, looked out over the sea and said in a voice of
weeping, 'Sailors, these are not the shores you promised to take
me to; yonder island is not my home.  What have I done that you
should treat me so?  It is small glory you will gain by cheating
a poor boy.'  I wept to hear him, but the crew laughed at both of
us, and sped the vessel fast over the sea.  All at once   strange
as it may seem, it is true   the vessel stopped, in the mid sea,
as fast as if it was fixed on the ground.  The men, astonished,
pulled at their oars, and spread more sail, trying to make
progress by the aid of both, but all in vain.  Ivy twined round
the oars and hindered their motion, and clung with its heavy
clusters of berries to the sails.  A vine, laden with grapes, ran
up the mast, and along the sides of the vessel.  The sound of
flutes was heard and the odor of fragrant wine spread all around.
The god himself had a chaplet of vine leaves, and bore in his
hand a spear wreathed with ivy.  Tigers crouched at his feet, and
lynxes and spotted panthers played around him.  The sailors were
seized with terror or madness; some leaped overboard; others,
preparing to do the same, beheld their companions in the water
undergoing a change, their bodies becoming flattened and ending
in a crooked tail.  One exclaimed, 'What miracle is this!' and as
he spoke his mouth widened, his nostrils expanded, and scales
covered all his body.  Another endeavoring to pull the oar felt
his hands shrink up, and presently to be no longer hands but
fins; another trying to raise his arms to a rope found he had no
arms, and curving his mutilated body, jumped into the sea.  What
had been his legs became the two ends of a crescent-shaped tail.
The whole crew became dolphins and swam about the ship, now upon
the surface, now under it, scattering the spray, and spouting the
water from their broad nostrils.  Of twenty men I alone was left.
The god cheered me, as I trembled with fear.  'Fear not,' said
he; 'steer toward Naxos.'  I obeyed, and when we arrived there, I
kindled the altars and celebrated the sacred rites of Bacchus."

Pentheus here exclaimed, "We have wasted time enough on this
silly story.  Take him away and have him executed without delay."
Acetes was led away by the attendants and shut up fast in prison;
but while they were getting ready the instruments of execution,
the prison doors opened of their own accord and the chains fell
from his limbs, and when the guards looked for him he was no
where to be found.

Pentheus would take no warning, but instead of sending others,
determined to go himself to the scene of the solemnities.  The
mountain Cithaeron was all alive with worshippers, and the cries
of the Bacchanals resounded on every side.  The noise roused the
anger of Pentheus as the sound of a trumpet does the fire of a
war-horse.  He penetrated the wood and reached an open space
where the wildest scene of the orgies met his eyes.  At the same
moment the women saw him; and first among them his own mother,
Agave, blinded by the god, cried out, "See there the wild boar,
the hugest monster that prowls in these woods!  Come on, sisters!
I will be the first to strike the wild boar."  The whole band
rushed upon him, and while he now talks less arrogantly, now
excuses himself, and now confesses his crime and implores pardon,
they press upon and wound him.  In vain he cries to his aunts to
protect him from his mother.  Autonoe seized one arm, Ino the
other, and between them he was torn to pieces, while his mother
shouted, "Victory!  Victory!  We have done it; the glory is
ours!"

So the worship of Bacchus was established in Greece.

There is an allusion to the story of Bacchus and the mariners in
Milton's Comus, at line 46.  The story of Circe will be found in
Chapter XXII.

"Bacchus that first from out the purple grape
Crushed the sweet poison of misused wine,
After the Tuscan mariners transformed,
Coasting the Tyrrhene shore as the winds listed
On Circe's island fell; (who knows not Circe,
The daughter of the Sun?  Whose charmed cup
Whoever tasted lost his upright shape,
And downward fell into a grovelling swine.)"


ARIADNE

We have seen in the story of Theseus how Ariadne, the daughter of
King Minos, after helping Theseus to escape from the labyrinth,
was carried by him to the island of Naxos and was left there
asleep, while Theseus pursued his way home without her.  Ariadne,
on waking and finding herself deserted, abandoned herself to
grief.  But Venus took pity on her, and consoled her with the
promise that she should have an immortal lover, instead of the
mortal one she had lost.

The island where Ariadne was left was the favorite island of
Bacchus, the same that he wished the Tyrrhenian mariners to carry
him to, when they so treacherously attempted to make prize of
him.  As Ariadne sat lamenting her fate, Bacchus found her,
consoled her and made her his wife as Minerva had prophesied to
Theseus.  As a marriage present he gave her a golden crown,
enriched with gems, and when she died, he took her crown and
threw it up into the sky.  As it mounted the gems grew brighter
and were turned into stars, and preserving its form Ariadne's
crown remains fixed in the heavens as a constellation, between
the kneeling Hercules and the man who holds the serpent.

Spenser alludes to Ariadne's crown, though he has made some
mistakes in his mythology.  It was at the wedding of Pirithous,
and not Theseus, that the Centaurs and Lapithae quarrelled.

"Look how the crown which Ariadne wore
Upon her ivory forehead that same day
That Theseus her unto his bridal bore,
When the bold Centaurs made that bloody fray
With the fierce Lapiths which did them dismay;
Being now placed in the firmament,
Through the bright heaven doth her beams display,
And is unto the stars an ornament,
Which round about her move in order excellent."


Chapter XV
The Rural Deities.   Erisichthon.   Rhoecus.   The Water Deities.
  Camenae.   Winds.

Pan, the god of woods and fields, of flocks and shepherds, dwelt
in grottos, wandered on the mountains and in valleys, and amused
himself with the chase or in leading the dances of the nymphs.
He was fond of music, and, as we have seen, the inventor of the
syrinx, or shepherd's pipe, which he himself played in a masterly
manner.  Pan, like other gods who dwelt in forests, was dreaded
by those whose occupations caused them to pass through the woods
by night, for the gloom and loneliness of such scenes dispose the
mind to superstitious fears.  Hence sudden fright without any
visible cause was ascribed to Pan, and called a Panic terror.

As the name of the god signifies in Greek, ALL, Pan came to be
considered a symbol of the universe and personification of
Nature; and later still to be regarded as a representative of all
the gods, and heathenism itself.

Sylvanus and Faunus were Latin divinities, whose characteristics
are so nearly the same as those of Pan that we may safely
consider them as the same personage under different names.

The wood-nymphs, Pan's partners in the dance, were but one of
several classes of nymphs.  There were beside them the Naiads,
who presided over brooks and fountains, the Oreads, nymphs of
mountains and grottos, and the Nereids, sea-nymphs.  The three
last named were immortal, but the wood-nymphs, called Dryads or
Hamadryads, were believed to perish with the trees which had been
their abode, and with which they had come into existence.  It was
therefore an impious act wantonly to destroy a tree, and in some
aggravated cases was severely punished, as in the instance of
Erisichthon, which we shall soon record.

Milton, in his glowing description of the early creation, thus
alludes to Pan as the personification of Nature:

"Universal Pan,
Knit with the Graces and the Hours in dance,
Led on the eternal spring."

And describing Eve's abode:

"In shadier bower
More sacred or sequestered, though but feigned,
Pan or Sylvanus never slept, nor nymph
Nor Faunus haunted."
Paradise lost, B. IV.

It was a pleasing trait in the old Paganism that it loved to
trace in every operation of nature the agency of deity.  The
imagination of the Greeks peopled all the regions of earth and
sea with divinities, to whose agency it attributed those
phenomena which our philosophy ascribes to the operation of the
laws of nature.  Sometimes in our poetical moods we feel disposed
to regret the change, and to think that the heart has lost as
much as the head has gained by the substitution.  The poet
Wordsworth thus strongly expresses this sentiment:

"Great God, I'd rather be
A Pagan, suckled in a creed outworn.
So might I, standing on this pleasant lea,
Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn;
Have sight of Proteus rising from th4e sea,
And hear old Tritou blow his wreathed horn."

Schiller, in his poem The Gods of Greece, expresses his regret
for the overthrow of the beautiful mythology of ancient times in
a way which has called forth an answer from a Christian poetess,
Mrs. Browning, in her poem called The Dead Pan.  The two
following verses are a specimen:

"By your beauty which confesses
Some chief Beauty conquering you,
By our grand heroic guesses
Through your falsehood at the True,
We will weep NOT!  Earth shall roll
Heir to each god's aureole,
And Pan is dead.

"Earth outgrows the mythic fancies
Sung beside her in her youth;
And those debonaire romances
Sound but dull beside the truth.
Phoebus' chariot course is run!
Look up poets, to the sun!
Pan, Pan is dead."

These lines are founded on an early Christian tradition that when
the heavenly host told the shepherds at Bethlehem of the birth of
Christ, a deep groan, heard through all the isles of Greece, told
that the great Pan was dead, and that all the royalty of Olympus
was dethroned, and the several deities were sent wandering in
cold and darkness.  So Milton, in his Hymn to the Nativity:

"The lonely mountains o'er,
And the resounding shore,
A voice of weeping heard and loud lament;
>From haunted spring and dale,
Edged with poplar pale,
The parting genius is with sighing sent;
With flower-enwoven tresses torn,
The nymphs in twilight shade of tangled thickets mourn."


ERISICHTHON

Erisichthon was a profane person and a despiser of the gods.  On
one occasion he presumed to violate with the axe a grove sacred
to Ceres.  There stood in this grove a venerable oak, so large
that it seemed a wood in itself, its ancient trunk towering
aloft, whereon votive garlands were often hung and inscriptions
carved expressing the gratitude of suppliants to the nymph of the
tree.  Often had the Dryads danced round it hand in hand.  Its
trunk measured fifteen cubits round, and it overtopped the other
trees as they overtopped the shrubbery.  But for all that,
Erisichthon saw no reason why he should spare it, and he ordered
his servants to cut it down.  When he saw them hesitate, he
snatched an axe from one, and thus impiously exclaimed, :"I care
not whether it be a tree beloved of the Goddess or not; were it
the goddess herself it should come down, if it stood in my way."
So saying, he lifted the axe, and the oak seemed to shudder and
utter a groan.  When the first blow fell upon the trunk, blood
flowed from the wound.  All the bystanders were horror-struck,
and one of them ventured to remonstrate and hold back the fatal
axe.  Erisichthon with a scornful look, said to him, "Receive the
reward of your piety;" and turned against him the weapon which he
had held aside from the tree, gashed his body with many wounds,
and cut off his head.  Then from the midst of the oak came a
voice, "I who dwell in this tree am a nymph beloved of Ceres, and
dying by your hands, forewarn you that punishment awaits you."
He desisted not from his crime, and at last the tree, sundered by
repeated blows and drawn by ropes, fell with a crash, and
prostrated a great part of the grove in its fall.

The Dryads, in dismay at the loss of their companion, and at
seeing the pride of the forest laid low, went in a body to Ceres,
all clad in garments of mourning, and invoked punishment upon
Erisichthon.  She nodded her assent, and as she bowed her head
the grain ripe for harvest in the laden fields bowed also.  She
planned a punishment so dire that one would pity him, if such a
culprit as he could be pitied   to deliver him over to Famine.
As Ceres herself could not approach Famine, for the Fates have
ordained that these two goddesses shall never come together, she
called an Oread from her mountain and spoke to her in these
words: "There is a place in the farthest part of ice-clad
Scythia, a sad and sterile region without trees and without
crops.  Cold dwells there, and Fear, and Shuddering, and Famine.
Go to Famine and tell her to take possession of the bowels of
Erisichthon.  Let not abundance subdue her, nor the power of my
gifts drive her away.  Be not alarmed at the distance," (for
Famine dwells very far from Ceres,) "but take my chariot.  The
dragons are fleet and obey the rein, and will take you through
the air in a short time."  So she gave her the reins, and she
drove away and soon reached Scythia.  On arriving at Mount
Caucasus she stopped the dragons and found Famine in a stony
field, pulling up with teeth and claws the scanty herbage.  Her
hair was rough, her eyes sunk, her face pale, her lips blanched,
her jaws covered with dust, and her skin drawn tight, so as to
show all her bones.  As the Oread saw her afar off (for she did
not dare to come near) she delivered the commands of Ceres; and
though she stopped as short a time as possible, and kept her
distance as well as she could, yet she began to feel hungry, and
turned the dragons' heads and drove back to Thessaly.

In obedience to the commands of Ceres, Famine sped through the
air to the dwelling of Erisichthon, entered the bed-chamber of
the guilty man, and found him asleep.  She enfolded him with her
wings and breathed herself into him, infusing her poison into his
veins.  Having discharged her task, she hastened to leave the
land of plenty and returned to her accustomed haunts.
Erisichthon still slept, and in his dreams craved food, and moved
his jaws as if eating.  When he awoke his hunger was raging.
Without a moment's delay he would have food set before him, of
whatever kind earth, sea, or air produces; and complained of
hunger even while he ate.  What would have sufficed for a city or
a nation was not enough for him.  The more he ate, the move he
craved.  His hunger was like the sea, which receives all the
rivers, yet is never filled; or like fire that burns all the fuel
that is heaped upon it, yet is still voracious for more.

His property rapidly diminished under the unceasing demands of
his appetite, but his hunger continued unabated.  At length he
had spent all, and had only his daughter left, a daughter worthy
of a better parent.  HER TOO HE SOLD.  She scorned to be the
slave of a purchaser, and as she stood by the seaside, raised her
hands in prayer to Neptune.  He heard her prayer, and, though her
new master was not far off, and had his eye upon her a moment
before, Neptune changed her form, and made her assume that of a
fisherman busy at his occupation.  Her master, looking for her
and seeing her in her altered form, addressed her and said, "Good
fisherman, whither went the maiden whom I saw just now, with hair
dishevelled and in humble garb, standing about where you stand?
Tell me truly; so may your luck be good, and not a fish nibble at
your hook and get away."   She perceived that her prayer was
answered, and rejoiced inwardly at hearing the question asked her
of herself.  She replied, "Pardon me, stranger, but I have been
so intent upon my line, that I have seen nothing else; but I wish
I may never catch another fish if I believe any woman or other
person except myself to have been hereabouts for some time."  He
was deceived and went his way, thinking his slave had escaped.
Then she resumed her own form.  Her father was well pleased to
find her still with him, and the money too that he got by the
sale of her; so he sold her again.  But she was changed by the
favor of Neptune as often as she was sold, now into a horse, now
a bird, now an ox, and now a stag,   got away from her purchasers
and came home.  By this base method the starving father procured
food; but not enough for his wants, and at last hunger compelled
him to devour his limbs, and he strove to nourish his body by
eating his body, till death relieved him from the vengeance of
Ceres.


RHOECUS

The Hamadryads could appreciate services as well as punish
injuries.  The story of Rhoecus proves this.  Rhoecus, happening
to see an oak just ready to fall, ordered his servants to prop it
up.  The nymph, who had been on the point of perishing with the
tree, came and expressed her gratitude to him for having saved
her life, and bade him ask what reward he would have for it.
Rhoecus boldly asked her love, and the nymph yielded to his
desire.  She at the same time charged him to be constant, and
told him that a bee should be her messenger, and let him know
when she would admit his society.  One time the bee came to
Rhoecus when he was playing at draughts, and he carelessly
brushed it away.  This so incensed the nymph that she deprived
him of sight.

Our countryman, James Russell Lowell, has taken this story for
the subject of one of his shorter poems.  He introduces it thus:


"Hear now this fairy legend of old Greece,
As full of freedom, youth and beauty still,
As the immortal freshness of that grace
Carved for all ages on some Attic frieze."

THE WATER DEITIES

Oceanus and Tethys were the Titans who ruled over the Sea.  When
Jove and his brothers overthrew the Titans and assumed their
power, Neptune and Amphitrite succeeded to the dominion of the
waters in place of Oceanus and Tethys.


NEPTUNE

Neptune was the chief of the water deities.  The symbol of his
power was the trident, or spear with three points, with which he
used to shatter rocks, to call forth or subdue storms, to shake
the shores, and the like.  He created the horse, and was the
patron of horse races.  His own horses had brazen hoofs and
golden manes.  They drew his chariot over the sea, which became
smooth before him, while the monsters of the deep gambolled about
his path.


AMPHITRITE

Amphitrite was the wife of Neptune.  She was the daughter of
Nereus and Doris, and the mother of Triton.  Neptune, to pay his
court to Amphitrite, came riding on the dolphin.  Having won her,
he rewarded the dolphin by placing him among the stars.


NEREUS AND DORIS

Nereus and Doris were the parents of the Nereids, the most
celebrated of whom were Amphitrite, Thetis, the mother of
Achilles, and Galatea, who was loved by the Cyclops Polyphemus.
Nereus was distinguished for his knowledge, and his love of truth
and justice, and is described as the wise and unerring Old Man of
the Sea.  The gift of prophecy was also ascribed to him.


TRITON AND PROTEUS

Triton was the son of Neptune and Amphitrite, and the poets make
him his father's trumpeter.  Proteus was also a son of Neptune.
He, like Nereus, is styled a sea-elder for his wisdom and
knowledge of future events.    His peculiar power was that of
changing his shape at will.


THETIS

Thetis, the daughter of Nereus and Doris, was so beautiful that
Jupiter himself sought her in marriage; but having learned from
Prometheus the Titan, that Thetis should bear a son who should be
greater than his father, Jupiter desisted from his suit and
decreed that Thetis should be the wife of a mortal.  By the aid
of Chiron the Centaur, Peleus succeeded in winning the goddess
for his bride, and their son was the renowned Achilles.  In our
chapter on the Trojan war it will appear that Thetis was a
faithful mother to him, aiding him in all difficulties, and
watching over his interests from the first to the last.


LEUCOTHEA AND PALAEMON

Ino, the daughter of Cadmus and wife of Athamas, flying from her
frantic husband, with her little son Melicertes in her arms,
sprang from a cliff into the sea.  The gods, out of compassion,
made her a goddess of the sea, under the name of Leucothea, and
him a god under that of Palaemon.  Both were held powerful to
save from shipwreck, and were invoked by sailors.  Palaemon was
usually represented riding on a dolphin.  The Isthmian games were
celebrated in his honor.  He was called Portumnus by the Romans,
and believed to have jurisdiction of the ports and shores.

Milton alludes to all these deities in the song at the conclusion
of Comus.

"Sabrina fair,
Listen and appear to us,
In name of great Oceanus;
By the earth-shaking Neptune's mace,
And Tethys' grave, majestic pace,
By hoary Nereus' wrinkled look,
And the Carpathian wizard's hook (Proteus)
By scaly Triton's winding shell,
And old soothsaying Glaucus; spell,
By Leucothea's lovely hands,
And her son who rules the strands,
By Thetis' tinsel-slippered feet,
And the songs of Sirens sweet."

Armstrong, the poet of the Art of preserving Health, under the
inspiration of Hygeia, the goddess of health, thus celebrates the
Naiads.  Paeon is a name both of Apollo and Aesculapius.

"Come, ye Naiads!  To the fountains lead!
Propitious maids!  The task remains to sing
Your gifts (so Paeon, so the powers of health
Command), to praise your crystal element.
Oh, comfortable streams!  With eager lips
And trembling hands the languid thirsty quaff
New life in you; fresh vigor fills their veins.
No warmer cups the rural ages knew,
None warmer sought the sires of humankind;
Happy in temperate peace their equal days
Felt not the alternate fits of feverish mirth
And sick dejection; still serene and pleased,
Blessed with divine immunity from ills,
Long centuries they lived; their only fate
Was ripe old age, and rather sleep than death."


THE CAMENAE

By this name the Latins designated the Muses, but included under
it also some other deities, principally nymphs of fountains.
Egeria was one of them, whose fountain and grotto are still
shown.  It was said that Numa, the second king of Rome, was
favored by this nymph with secret interviews, in which she taught
him those lessons of wisdom and of law which he embodied in the
institutions of his rising nation.  After the death of Numa the
nymph pined away and was changed into a fountain.

Byron, in Childe Harold, Canto IV., thus alludes to Egeria and
her grotto:

"Here didst thou dwell in this enchanted cover,
Egeria!  All thy heavenly bosom beating
For the far footsteps of thy mortal lover;
The purple midnight veiled that mystic meeting
With her most starry canopy."

Tennyson, also, in his Palace of Art, gives us a glimpse of the
royal lover expecting the interview.

"Holding one hand against his ear,
To list a footfall ere he saw
The wood-nymph, stayed the Tuscan king to hear
Of wisdom and of law."


THE WINDS

When so many less active agencies were personified, it is not to
be supposed that the winds failed to be so.  They were Boreas or
Aquilo, the north wind, Zephyrus or Favonius, the west, Notus or
Auster, the south, and Eurus, the east.  The first two have been
chiefly celebrated by the poets, the former as the type of
rudeness, the latter of gentleness.  Boreas loved the nymph
Orithyia, and tried to play the lover's part, but met with poor
success.  It was hard for him to breathe gently, and sighing was
out of the question.  Weary at last of fruitless endeavors, he
acted out his true character, seized the maiden and carried her
off.  Their children were Zetes and Calais, winged warriors, who
accompanied the Argonautic expedition, and did good service in an
encounter with those monstrous birds the Harpies.

Zephyrus was the lover of Flora.  Milton alludes to them in
Paradise Lost, where he describes Adam waking and contemplating
Eve still asleep:

"He on his side
Leaning half raised, with looks of cordial love
Hung over her enamored, and beheld
Beauty which, whether waking or asleep,
Shot forth peculiar graces; then with voice,
Mild as when Zephyrus on Flora breathes,
Her hand soft touching, whispered thus, 'Awake!
My fairest, my espoused, my latest found,
Heaven's last, best gift, my ever-new delight.'"

Dr. Young, the poet of the Night Thoughts, addressing the idle
and luxurious, says:

"Ye delicate!  Who nothing can support
(Yourselves most insupportable), for whom
The winter rose must blow, . .
. . . .  And silky soft
Favonious breathe still softer or be chid!"

Fortuna is the Latin name for Tyche, the goddess of Fortune.  The
worship of Fortuna held a position of much higher importance at
Rome than did the worship of Tyche among the Greeks.  She was
regarded at Rome as the goddess of good fortune only, and was
usually represented holding the cornucopia.

Victoria, the Latin form for the goddess Nike, was highly honored
among the conquest-loving Romans, and many temples were dedicated
to her at Rome.  There was a celebrated temple at Athens to the
Greek goddess Nike Apteros, or Wingless Victory, of which remains
still exist.


Chapter XVI
Achelous and Hercules.   Admetus and Alcestis.   Antigone.
Penelope

The river-god Achelous told the story of Erisichthon to Theseus
and his companions, whom he was entertaining at his hospitable
board, while they were delayed on their journey by the overflow
of his waters.  Having finished his story, he added, "But why
should I tell of other persons' transformations, when I myself am
an instance of the possession of this power.  Sometimes I become
a serpent, and sometimes a bull, with horns on my head.  Or I
should say, I once could do so; but now I have but one horn,
having lost one."  And here he groaned and was silent.

Theseus asked him the cause of his grief, and how he lost his
horn.  To which question the river-god replied as follows: "Who
likes to tell of his defeats?  Yet I will not hesitate to relate
mine, comforting myself with the thought of the greatness of my
conqueror, for it was Hercules.  Perhaps you have heard of the
fame of Dejanira, the fairest of maidens, whom a host of suitors
strove to win.  Hercules and myself were of the number, and the
rest yielded to us two.  He urged in his behalf his descent from
Jove, and his labors by which he had exceeded the exactions of
Juno, his step-mother.  I, on the other hand, said to the father
of the maiden, 'Behold me, the king of the waters that flow
through your land.  I am no stranger from a foreign shore, but
belong to the country, a part of your realm.  Let it not stand in
my way that royal Juno owes me no enmity, nor punishes me with
heavy tasks.  As for this man, who boasts himself the son of
Jove, it is either a false pretence, or disgraceful to him if
true, for it cannot be true except by his mother's shame.'  As I
said this Hercules scowled upon me, and with difficulty
restrained his rage.  'My hand will answer better than my
tongue,' said he.  'I yield you the victory in words, but trust
my cause to the strife of deeds.  With that he advanced towards
me, and I was ashamed, after what I had said, to yield.  I threw
off my green vesture, and presented myself for the struggle.  He
tried to throw me, now attacking my head, now my body.  My bulk
was my protection, and he assailed me in vain.  For a time we
stopped, then returned to the conflict.  We each kept our
position, determined not to yield, foot to foot, I bending over
him, clinching his hands in mine, with my forehead almost
touching his.  Thrice Hercules tried to throw me off, and the
fourth time he succeeded, brought me to the ground and himself
upon my back.  I tell you the truth, it was as if a mountain had
fallen on me.  I struggled to get my arms at liberty, panting and
reeking with perspiration.  He gave me no chance to recover, but
seized my throat.  My knees were on the earth and my mouth in the
dust.

"Finding that I was no match for him in the warrior's art, I
resorted to others, and glided away in the form of a serpent.  I
curled my body in a coil, and hissed at him with my forked
tongue.  He smiled scornfully at this, and said, 'It was the
labor of my infancy to conquer snakes.'  So saying he clasped my
neck with his hands.  I was almost choked, and struggled to get
my neck out of his grasp.  Vanquished in this form, I tried what
alone remained to me, and assumed the form of a bull.  He grasped
my neck with his arm, and, dragging my head down to the ground,
overthrew me on the sand.  Nor was this enough.  His ruthless
hand rent my horn from my head.  The Naiades took it, consecrated
it, and filled it with fragrant flowers.  Plenty adopted my horn,
and made it her own, and called it Cornucopia.

The ancients were fond of finding a hidden meaning in their
mythological tales.  They explain this fight of Achelous with
Hercules by saying Achelous was a river that in seasons of rain
overflowed its banks.  When the fable says that Achelous loved
Dejanira, and sought a union with her, the meaning is, that the
river in its windings flowed through part of Dejanira's kingdom.
It was said to take the form of a snake because of its winding,
and of a bull because it made a brawling or roaring in its
course.  When the river swelled, it made itself another channel.
Thus its head was horned.  Hercules prevented the return of these
periodical overflows, by embankments and canals; and therefore he
was said to have vanquished the river-god and cut off his horn.
Finally, the lands formerly subject to overflow, but now
redeemed, became very fertile, and this is meant by the horn of
plenty.

There is another account of the origin of the Cornucopia.
Jupiter at his birth was committed by his mother Rhea to the care
of the daughters of Melisseus, a Cretan king.  They fed the
infant deity with the milk of the goat Amalthea.  Jupiter broke
off one of the horns of the goat and gave it to his nurses, and
endowed it with the wonderful power of becoming filled with
whatever the possessor might wish.

The name of Amalthea is also given by some writers to the mother
of Bacchus.  It is thus used by Milton, Paradise Lost, Book IV.:


"That Nyseian isle,
Girt with the river Triton, where old Cham,
Whom Gentiles Ammon call, and Libyan Jove,
Hid Amalthea and her florid son,
Young Bacchus, from his stepdame Rhea's eye."


ADMETUS AND ALCESTIS

Aesculapius, the son of Apollo, was endowed by his father with
such skill in the healing art that he even restored the dead to
life.  At this Pluto took alarm, and prevailed on Jupiter to
launch a thunderbolt at Aesculapius.  Apollo was indignant at the
destruction of his son, and wreaked his vengeance on the innocent
workmen who had made the thunderbolt.  These were the Cyclopes,
who have their workshop under Mount Aetna, from which the smoke
and flames of their furnaces are constantly issuing.  Apollo shot
his arrows at the Cyclopes, which so incensed Jupiter that he
condemned him as a punishment to become he servant of a mortal
for the space of one year.  Accordingly Apollo went into the
service of Admetus, king of Thessaly, and pastured his flocks for
him on the verdant banks of the river Amphrysus.

Admetus was a suitor, with others, for the hand of Alcestis, the
daughter of Pelias, who promised her to him who should come for
her in a chariot drawn by lions and boars.  This task Admetus
performed by the assistance of his divine herdsman, and was made
happy in the possession of Alcestis.  But Admetus fell ill, and
being near to death, Apollo prevailed on the Fates to spare him
on condition that some one would consent to die in his stead.
Admetus, in his joy at this reprieve, thought little of the
ransom, and perhaps remembering the declarations of attachment
which he had often heard from his courtiers and dependents,
fancied that it would be easy to find a substitute.  But it was
not so.  Brave warriors, who would willingly have perilled their
lives for their prince, shrunk from the thought of dying for him
on the bed of sickness; and old servants who had experienced his
bounty and that of his house from their childhood up, were not
willing to lay down the scanty remnant of their days to show
their gratitude.  Men asked,   "Why does not one of his parents
do it?  They cannot in the course of nature live much longer, and
who can feel like them the call to rescue the life they gave from
an untimely end?"  But the parents, distressed though they were
at the thought of losing him, shrunk from the call.  Then
Alcestis, with a generous self-devotion, proffered herself as the
substitute.  Admetus, fond as he was of life, would not have
submitted to receive it at such a cost; but there was no remedy.
The condition imposed by the Fates had been met, and the decree
was irrevocable.  Alcestis sickened as Admetus revived, and she
was rapidly sinking to the grave.

Just at this time Hercules arrived at the palace of Admetus, and
found all the inmates in great distress for the impending loss of
the devoted wife and beloved mistress.  Hercules, to whom no
labor was too arduous, resolved to attempt her rescue.  He went
and lay in wait at the door of the chamber of the dying queen,
and when Death came for his prey, he seized him and forced him to
resign his victim.  Alcestis recovered, and was restored to her
husband.

Milton alludes to the story of Alcestis in his Sonnet on his
deceased wife.

"Methought I saw my late espoused saint,
Brought to me like Alcestis from the grave,
Whom Jove's great son to her glad husband gave,
Rescued from death by force, though pale and faint."

James Russell Lowell has chosen the "Shepherd of King Admetus"
for the subject of a short poem.  He makes that event the first
introduction of poetry to men.

"Men called him but a shiftless youth,
In whom no good they saw,
And yet unwittingly, in truth,
They made his careless words their law.
And day by day more holy grew
Each spot where he had trod,
Till after poets only knew
Their first-born brother was a god."

In The Love of Alcestis, one of the poems in The Earthly
Paradise, Mr. Morris thus tells the story of the taming of the
lions:

"----- Rising up no more delay he made,
But took the staff and gained the palace-door
Where stood the beasts, whose mingled whine and roar
Had wrought his dream; there two and two they stood,
Thinking, it might be, of the tangled wood,
And all the joys of the food-hiding trees.
But harmless as their painted images
'Neath some dread spell; then, leaping up, he took
The reins in hand and the bossed leather shook,
And no delay the conquered beasts durst make,
But drew, not silent; and folk just awake,
When he went by as though a god they saw,
Fell on their knees, and maidens come to draw
Fresh water from the fount, sank trembling down,
And silence held the babbling, wakened town."


ANTIGONE

The poems and histories of legendary Greece often relate, as has
been seen, to women and their lives.  Antigone was as bright an
example of filial and sisterly fidelity as was Alcestis of
connubial devotion.  She was the daughter of OEdipus and Jocasta,
who, with all their descendants, were the victims of an
unrelenting fate, dooming them to destruction.  OEdipus in his
madness had torn out his eyes, and was driven forth from his
kingdom Thebes, dreaded and abandoned by all men, as an object of
divine vengeance.  Antigone, his daughter, alone shared his
wanderings, and remained with him till he died, and then returned
to Thebes.

Her brothers, Eteocles and Polynices, had agreed to share the
kingdom between them, and reign alternately year by year.  The
first year fell to the lot of Eteocles, who, when his time
expired, refused to surrender the kingdom to his brother.
Polynices fled to Adrastus, king of Argos, who gave him his
daughter in marriage, and aided him with an army to enforce his
claim to the kingdom.  This led to the celebrated expedition of
the "Seven against Thebes," which furnished ample materials for
the epic and tragic poets of Greece.

Amphiaraus, the brother-in-law of Adrastus, opposed the
enterprise, for he was a soothsayer, and knew by his art that no
one of the leaders except Adrastus would live to return.  But
Amphiaraus, on his marriage to Eriphyle, the king's sister, had
agreed that whenever he and Adrastus should differ in opinion,
the decision should be left to Eriphyle.  Polynices, knowing
this, gave Eriphyle the collar of Harmonia, and thereby gained
her to his interest.  This collar or necklace was a present which
Vulcan had given to Harmonia on her marriage with Cadmus, and
Polynices had taken it with him on his flight from Thebes.
Eriphyle could not resist so tempting a bribe, and by her
decision the war was resolved on, and Amphiaraus went to his
certain fate.  He bore his part bravely in the contest, but could
not avert his destiny.  Pursued by the enemy he fled along the
river, when a thunderbolt launched by Jupiter opened the ground,
and he, his chariot, and his charioteer, were swallowed up.

It would not be in place here to detail all the acts of heroism
or atrocity which marked the contest; but we must not omit to
record the fidelity of Evadne as an offset to the weakness of
Eriphyle.  Capaneus, the husband of Evadne, in the ardor of the
fight, declared that he would force his way into the city in
spite of Jove himself.  Placing a ladder against the wall, he
mounted, but Jupiter, offended at his impious language, struck
him with a thunderbolt.  When his obsequies were celebrated,
Evadne cast herself on his funeral pile and perished.

Early in the contest Eteocles consulted the soothsayer Tiresias
as to the issue.  Tiresias, in his youth, had by chance seen
Minerva bathing.  The goddess in her wrath deprived him of his
sight, but afterwards relenting gave him in compensation the
knowledge of future events.  When consulted by Eteocles, he
declared that victory should fall to Thebes if Menoeceus, the son
of Creon, gave himself a voluntary victim.  The heroic youth,
learning the response, threw away his life in the first
encounter.

The siege continued long, with various success.  At length both
hosts agreed that the brothers should decide their quarrel by
single combat.  They fought and fell by each other's hands.  The
armies then renewed the fight, and at last the invaders were
forced to yield, and fled, leaving their dead unburied.  Creon,
the uncle of the fallen princes, now become king, caused Eteocles
to be buried with distinguished honor, but suffered the body of
Polynices to lie where it fell, forbidding every one, on pain of
death, to give it burial.

Antigone, the sister of Polynices, heard with indignation the
revolting edict which consigned her brother's body to the dogs
and vultures, depriving it of those rites which were considered
essential to the repose of the dead.  Unmoved by the dissuading
counsel of an affectionate but timid sister, and unable to
procure assistance, she determined to brave the hazard and to
bury the body with her own hands.  She was detected in the act,
and Creon gave orders that she should be buried alive, as having
deliberately set at nought the solemn edict of the city.  Her
love, Haemon, the son of Creon, unable to avert her fate, would
not survive her, and fell by his own hand.

Antigone forms the subject of two fine tragedies of the Grecian
poet Sophocles.  Mrs. Jameson, in her Characteristics of Women,
has compared her character with that of Cordelia, in
Shakespeare's King Lear.  The perusal of her remarks cannot fail
to gratify our readers.

The following is the lamentation of Antigone over OEdipus, when
death has at last relieved him from his sufferings:

"Alas!  I only wished I might have died
With my poor father; wherefore should I ask
For longer life?
Oh, I was fond of misery with him;
E'en what was most unlovely grew beloved
When he was with me.  Oh, my dearest father,
Beneath the earth now in deep darkness hid,
Worn as thou wert with age, to me thou still
Wast dear, and shalt be ever."
Francklin's Sophocles


PENELOPE

Penelope is another of those mythic heroines whose beauties were
rather those of character and conduct than of person.  She was
the daughter of Icarius, a Spartan prince.  Ulysses, king of
Ithaca, sought her in marriage, and won her over all competitors.
When the moment came for the bride to leave her father's house,
Icarius, unable to bear the thoughts of parting with his
daughter, tried to persuade her to remain with him, and not
accompany her husband to Ithaca.  Ulysses gave Penelope her
choice, to stay or go with him.   Penelope made no reply, but
dropped her veil over her face.  Icarius urged her no further,
but when she was gone erected a statue to Modesty on the spot
where they parted.

Ulysses and Penelope had not enjoyed their union more than a year
when it was interrupted by the events which called Ulysses to the
Trojan war.  During his long absence, and when it was doubtful
whether he still lived, and highly improbable that he would ever
return, Penelope was importuned by numerous suitors, from whom
there seemed no refuge but in choosing one of them for her
husband.  Penelope, however, employed every art to gain time,
still hopping for Ulysses' return.  One of her arts of delay was
engaging in the preparation of a robe for the funeral canopy of
Laertes, her husband's father.  She pledged herself to make her
choice among the suitors when the robe was finished.  During the
day she worked at the robe, but in the night she undid the work
of the day.  This is the famous Penelope's web, which is used as
a proverbial expression for anything which is perpetually doing
but never done.  The rest of Penelope's history will be told when
we give an account of her husband's adventures.


Chapter XVII
Orpheus and Eurydice.   Artistaeus.   Amphion.   Linus.
Thamyris.   Marsyas.   Melampus.   Musaeus

Orpheus was the son of Apollo and the muse Calliope.  He was
presented by his father with a lyre and taught to play upon it,
and he played to such perfection that nothing could withstand the
charm of his music.  Not only his fellow mortals, but wild beasts
were softened by his strains, and gathering round him laid by
their fierceness, and stood entranced with his lay.  Nay, the
very trees and rocks were sensible to the charm.  The former
crowded round him and the latter relaxed somewhat of their
hardness, softened by his notes.

Hymen had been called to bless with his presence the nuptials of
Orpheus with Eurydice; but though he attended, he brought no
happy omens with him.  His very torch smoked and brought tears
into their eyes.  In coincidence with such prognostics Eurydice,
shortly after her marriage, while wandering with the nymphs, her
companions, was seen by the shepherd Aristaeus, who was struck
with her beauty, and made advances to her.  She fled, and in
flying trod upon a snake in the grass, was bitten in the foot and
died.  Orpheus sang his grief to all who breathed the upper air,
both gods and men, and finding it all unavailing resolved to seek
his wife in the regions of the dead.  He descended by a cave
situated on the side of the promontory of Taenarus and arrived at
the Stygian realm.  He passed through crowds of ghosts, and
presented himself before the throne of Pluto and Proserpine.
Accompanying the words with the lyre, he sung, "O deities of the
underworld, to whom all we who live must come, hear my words, for
they are true!  I come not to spy out the secrets of Tartarus,
nor to try my strength against the three-headed dog with snaky
hair who guards the entrance.  I come to seek my wife, whose
opening years the poisonous viper's fang has brought to an
untimely end.  Love had led me here, Love, a god all powerful
with us who dwell on the earth, and, if old traditions say true,
not less so here.  I implore you by these abodes full of terror,
these realms of silence and uncreated things, unite again the
thread of Eurydice's life.  We all are destined to you, and
sooner or later must pass to your domain.  She too, when she
shall have filled her term of life, will rightly be yours. But
till then grant her to me, I beseech you.  If you deny me, I
cannot return alone; you shall triumph in the death of us both."

As he sang these tender strains, the very ghosts shed tears.
Tantalus, in spite of his thirst, stopped for a moment his
efforts for water, Ixion's wheel stood still, the vulture ceased
to tear the giant's liver, the daughters of Danaus rested from
their task of drawing water in a sieve, and Sisyphus sat on his
rock to listen.  Then for the first time, it is said, the cheeks
of the Furies were wet with tears.  Proserpine could not resist,
and Pluto himself gave way.  Eurydice was called.  She came from
among the new-arrived ghosts, limping with her wounded foot.
Orpheus was permitted to take her away with him on one condition,
that he should not turn round to look at her till they should
have reached the upper air.  Under this condition they proceeded
on their way, he leading, she following, through passages dark
and steep, in total silence, till they had nearly reached the
outlet into the cheerful upper world, when Orpheus, in a moment
of forgetfulness, to assure himself that she was still following,
cast a glance behind him, when instantly she was borne away.
Stretching out their arms to embrace one another they grasped
only the air.  Dying now a second time she yet cannot reproach
her husband, for how can she blame his impatience to behold her?
"Farewell," she said, "a last farewell,"   and was hurried away,
so fast that the sound hardly reached his ears.

Orpheus endeavored to follow her, and besought permission to
return and try once more for her release but the stern ferryman
repulsed him and refused passage.  Seven days he lingered about
the brink, without food or sleep; then bitterly accusing of
cruelty the powers of Erebus, he sang his complaints to the rocks
and mountains, melting the hearts of tigers and moving the oaks
from their stations.  He held himself aloof from womankind,
dwelling constantly on the recollection of his sad mischance.
The Thracian maidens tried their best to captivate him, but he
repulsed their advances.   They bore with him as long as they
could; but finding him insensible, one day, one of them, excited
by the rites of Bacchus, exclaimed, "See yonder our despiser!"
and threw at him her javelin.  The weapon, as soon as it came
within the sound of his lyre, fell harmless at his feet.  So did
also the stones that they threw at him.  But the women raised a
scream and drowned the voice of the music, and then the missiles
reached him and soon were stained with his blood.  The maniacs
tore him limb from limb, and threw his head and his lyre into the
river Hebrus, down which they floated, murmuring sad music, to
which the shores responded a plaintive symphony.  The Muses
gathered up the fragments of his body and buried them at
Libethra, where the nightingale is said to sing over his grave
more sweetly than in any other part of Greece.  His lyre was
placed by Jupiter among the stars.  His shade passed a second
time to Tartarus, where he sought out his Eurydice and embraced
her, with eager arms.  They roam through those happy fields
together now, sometimes he leads, sometimes she; and Orpheus
gazes as much as he will upon her, no longer incurring a penalty
for a thoughtless glance.

The story of Orpheus has furnished Pope with an illustration of
the power of music, for his Ode for St. Cecelia's Day.  The
following stanza relates the conclusion of the story:

"But soon, too soon the lover turns his eyes;
Again she falls, again she dies, she dies!
How wilt thou now the fatal sisters move?
No crime was thine, if 'tis no crime to love.
Now under hanging mountains,
Beside the falls of fountains,
Or where Hebrus wanders,
Rolling in meanders,
All alone,
He makes his moan,
And calls her ghost,
Forever, ever, ever lost!
Now with furies surrounded,
Despairing, confounded,
He trembles, he glows,
Amidst Rhodope's snows.
See, wild as the winds o'er the desert he flies;
Hark!  Haemus resounds with the Bacchanals' cries.
Ah, see, he dies!
Yet even in death Eurydice he sung,
Eurydice still trembled on his tongue;
Eurydice the woods,
Eurydice the floods,
Eurydice the rocks and hollow mountains rung."

The superior melody of the nightingale's song over the grave of
Orpheus, is alluded to by Southey in his Thalaba:

"Then on his ear what sounds
Of harmony arose!
Far music and the distance-mellowed song
>From bowers of merriment;
The waterfall remote;
The murmuring of the leafy groves;
The single nightingale
Perched in the rosier by, so richly toned,
That never from that most melodious bird
Singing a love-song to his brooding mate,
Did Thracian shepherd by the grave
Of Orpheus hear a sweeter melody,
Though there the spirit of the sepulchre
All his own power infuse, to swell
The incense that he loves."


ARISTAEUS, THE BEE-KEEPER

Man avails himself of the instincts of the inferior animals for
his own advantage.  Hence sprang the art of keeping bees.  Honey
must first have been known as a wild product, the bees building
their structures in hollow trees or holes in the rocks, or any
similar cavity that chance offered.  Thus occasionally the
carcass of a dead animal would be occupied by the bees for that
purpose.  It was no doubt from some such incident that the
superstition arose that the bees were engendered by the decaying
flesh of the animal; and Virgil, in the following story (From the
Georgies, Book IV.1.317), shows how this supposed fact may be
turned to account for renewing the swarm when it has been lost by
disease or accident.

The shepherd Aristaeus, who first taught the management of bees,
was the son of the water-nymph Cyrene.  His bees had perished,
and he resorted for aid to his mother.  He stood at the river
side and thus addressed her: "Oh, mother, the pride of my life is
taken from me!  I have lost my precious bees.  My care and skill
have availed me nothing, and you, my mother, have not warded off
from me the blow of misfortune."  His mother heard these
complaints as she sat in her palace at the bottom of the river
with her attendant nymphs around her.  They were engaged in
female occupations, spinning and weaving, while one told stories
to amuse the rest.  The sad voice of Aristaeus interrupting their
occupation, one of them put her head above the water and seeing
him, returned and gave information to his mother, who ordered
that he should be brought into her presence.  The river at her
command opened itself and let him pass in, while it stood curled
like a mountain on either side.  He descended to the region where
the fountains of the great rivers lie; he saw the enormous
receptacles of waters and was almost deafened with the roar,
while he surveyed them hurrying off in various directions to
water the face of the earth.  Arriving at his mother's apartment
he was hospitably received by Cyrene and her nymphs, who spread
their table with the richest dainties.  They first poured out
libations to Neptune, then regaled themselves with the feast, and
after that Cyrene thus addressed him: "There is an old prophet
named Proteus, who dwells in the sea and is a favorite of
Neptune, whose herd of sea-calves he pastures.  We nymphs hold
him in great respect, for he is a learned sage, and knows all
things, past, present, and to come.  He can tell you, my son, the
cause of the mortality among your bees, and how you may remedy
it.  But he will not do it voluntarily, however you may entreat
him.  You must compel him by force.  If you seize him and chain
him, he will answer your questions in order to get released, for
he cannot, by all his arts, get away if you hold fast the chains.
I will carry you to his cave, where he comes at noon to take his
midday repose.  Then you may easily secure him.  But when he
finds himself captured, his resort is to a power he possesses of
changing himself into various forms.  He will become a wild boar
or a fierce tiger, a scaly dragon, or lion with yellow mane.  Or
he will make a noise like the crackling of flames or the rush of
water, so as to tempt you to let go the chain, when he will make
his escape.  But you have only to keep him fast bound, and at
last when he finds all his arts unavailing, he will return to his
own figure and obey your commands."  So saying she sprinkled her
son with fragrant nectar, the beverage of the gods, and
immediately an unusual vigor filled his frame and courage his
heart, while perfume breathed all around him.

The nymph led her son to the prophet's cave, and concealed him
among the recesses of the rocks, while she herself took her place
behind the clouds.  Then noon came and the hour when men and
herds retreat from the glaring sun to indulge in quiet slumber,
Proteus issued from the water, followed hy his herd of sea-
calves, which spread themselves along the shore.  He sat on the
rock and counted his herd; then stretched himself on the floor of
the cave and went to sleep.   Aristaeus hardly allowed him to get
fairly asleep before he fixed the fetters on him and shouted
aloud.  Proteus, waking and finding himself captured, immediately
resorted to his arts, becoming first a fire, then a flood, then a
horrible wild beast, in rapid succession.  But trying all in
vain, he at last resumed his own form and addressed the youth in
angry accents: "Who are you, bold youth, who thus invade my
abode, and what do you want with me?"  Aristaeus replied,
"Proteus, you know already, for it is needless for any one to
attempt to deceive you.  And do you also cease your efforts to
elude me.  I am led hither by divine assistance, to know from you
the cause of my misfortune and how to remedy it."  At these words
the prophet, fixing on him his gray eyes with a piercing look,
thus spoke: "You received the merited reward of your deeds, by
which Eurydice met her death, for in flying from you she trod
upon a serpent, of whose bite she died.  To avenge her death the
nymphs, her companions, have sent this destruction bo your bees.
You have to appease their anger, and thus it must be done: Select
four bulls of perfect form and size, and four cows of equal
beauty, build four altars to the nymphs, and sacrifice the
animals, leaving their carcasses in the leafy grove.  To Orpheus
and Eurydice you shall pay such funeral honors as may allay their
resentment.  Returning after nine days you will examine the
bodies of the cattle slain and see what will befall."  Aristaeus
faithfully obeyed these directions.  He sacrificed the cattle, he
left their bodies in the grove, he offered funeral honors to the
shades of Orpheus and Eurydice; then returning on the ninth day
he examined the bodies of the animals, and, wonderful to relate!
A swarm of bees had taken possession of one of the carcasses, and
were pursuing their labors there as in a hive.

In the Task, Cowper alludes to the story of Aristaeus, when
speaking of the ice-palace built by the Empress Anne of Russia.
He has been describing the fantastic forms which ice assumes in
connection with waterfalls, etc."

"Less worthy of applause though more admired,
Because a novelty, the work of man,
Imperial mistress of the fur-clad Russ,
Thy most magnificent and mighty freak,
The wonder of the north.  No forest fell
When thou wouldst build, no quarry sent its stores
T'enrich thy walls; but thou didst hew the floods
And make thy marble of the glassy wave.
In such a palace Aristaeus found
Cyrene, when he bore the plaintive tale
Of his lost bees to her maternal ear."

Milton also appears to have had Cyrene and her domestic scene in
his mind when he describes to us Sabrina, the nymph of the river
Severn, in the Guardian-spirit's Song in Comus:

"Sabrina fair!
Listen when thou art sitting
Under the glassy, cool, translucent wave
In twisted braids of lilies knitting
The loose train of thy amber-dropping hair;
Listen for dear honor's sake,
Goddess of the silver lake!
Listen and save."

The following are other celebrated mythical poets and musicians,
some of whom were hardly inferior to Orpheus himself:


AMPHION

Amphion was the son of Jupiter and Antiope, queen of Thebes.
With his twin brother Zethus he was exposed at birth on Mount
Cithaeron, where they grew up among the shepherds, not knowing
their parentage.  Mercury gave Amphion a lyre, and taught him to
play upon it, and his brother occupied himself in hunting and
tending the flocks.  Meanwhile Antiope, their mother, who had
been treated with great cruelty by Lycus, the usurping king of
Thebes, and by Dirce, his wife, found means to inform her
children of their rights, and to summon them to her assistance.
With a band of their fellow-herdsmen they attacked and slew
Lycus, and tying Dirce by the hair of her head to a bull, let him
drag her till she was dead (the punishment of Dirce is the
subject of a celebrated group of statuary now in the Museum at
Naples).  Amphion, having become king of Thebes fortified the
city with a wall.  It is said that when he played on his lyre the
stones moved of their own accord and took their places in the
wall.

In Tennyson's poem of Amphion is an amusing use of this story:

"Oh, had I lived when song was great,
In days of old Amphion,
And ta'en my fiddle to the gate
Nor feared for reed or scion!

And had I lived when song was great,
And legs of trees were limber,
And ta'en my fiddle to the gate,
And fiddled to the timber!

"'Tis said he had a tuneful tongue,
Such happy intonation,
Wherever he sat down and sung
He left a small plantation;
Whenever in a lonely grove
He set up his forlorn pipes,
The gouty oak began to move
And flounder into hornpipes."

LINUS

Linus was the instructor of Hercules in music, but having one day
reproved his pupil rather harshly, he roused the anger of
Hercules, who struck him with his lyre and killed him.


THAMYRIS

An ancient Thracian bard, who in his presumption challenged the
Muses to a trial of skill, and being overcome in the contest was
deprived by them of his sight.  Milton alludes to him with other
blind bards, when speaking of his own blindness (Paradise Lost,
Book III.35).


MARSYAS

Minerva invented the flute, and played upon it to the delight of
all the celestial auditors; but the mischievous urchin Cupid
having dared to laugh at the queer face which the goddess made
while playing, Minerva threw the instrument indignantly away, and
it fell down to earth, and was found by Marsyas.  He blew upon
it, and drew from it such ravishing sounds that he was tempted to
challenge Apollo himself to a musical contest.  The god of course
triumphed, and punished Marsyas by flaying him alive.


MELAMPUS

Melampus was the first mortal endowed with prophetic powers.
Before his house there stood an oak tree containing a serpent's
nest.  The old serpents were killed by the servants, but Melampus
took care of the young ones and fed them carefully.  One day when
he was asleep under the oak, the serpents licked his ears with
their tongues.  On awaking he was astonished to find that he now
understood the language of birds and creeping things.  This
knowledge enabled him to foretell future events, and he became a
renowned soothsayer.  At one time his enemies took him captive
and kept him strictly imprisoned.  Melampus in the silence of
night heard the wood-worms in the timbers talking together, and
found out by what they said that the timbers were nearly eaten
through, and the roof would soon fall in.  He told his captors
and demanded to be let out, warning them also.  They took his
warning, and thus escaped destruction, and rewarded Malampus and
held him in high honor.


MUSAEUS

A semi-mythological personage who was represented by one
tradition to be the son of Orpheus.  He is said to have written
sacred poems and oracles.  Milton couples his name with that of
Orpheus in his Il Penseroso:

"But, oh, sad virgin, that thy power
Might raise Musaeus from his bower,
Or bed the soul of Orpheus sing
Such notes as warbled to the string,
Drew iron tears down Pluto's cheek,
And made Hell grant what love did seek."


Chapter XVIII
Arion.   Ibycus.   Simonides.   Sappho

The poets whose adventures compose this chapter were real
persons, some of whose works yet remain, and their influence on
poets who succeeded them is yet more important than their
poetical remains. The adventures recorded of them in the
following stories rest on the same authority as other narratives
of the Age of Fable, that is, that of the poets who have told
them.  In their present form, the first two are translated from
the German, the story of Arion from Schlegel, and that of Ibycus
from Schiller.

ARION

Arion was a famous musician, and dwelt at the court of Periander,
king of Corinth, with whom he was a great favorite.  There was to
be a musical contest in Sicily, and Arion longed to compete for
the prize.  He told his wish to Periander, who besought him like
a brother to give up the thought.  "Pray stay with me," he said,
"and be contented.  He who strives to win may lose."  Arion
answered, "A wandering life best suits the free heart of a poet.
The talent which a god bestowed on me, I would fain make a source
of pleasure to others.  And if I win the prize, how will the
enjoyment of it be increased by the consciousness of my wide-
spread fame!"  He went, won the prize, and embarked with his
wealth in a Corinthian ship for home.  On the second morning
after setting sail, the wind breathed mild and fair.  "Oh,
Periander," he exclaimed, "dismiss your fears!  Soon shall you
forget them in my embrace.  With what lavish offerings will we
display our gratitude to the gods, and how merry will we be at
the festal board!"  The wind and sea continued propitious.  Not a
cloud dimmed the firmament.  He had not trusted too much to the
ocean,   but he had to man.  He overheard the seamen exchanging
hints with one another, and found they were plotting to possess
themselves of his treasure.  Presently they surrounded him loud
and mutinous, and said, "Arion, you must die!  If you would have
a grave on shore, yield yourself to die on this spot; but if
otherwise, cast yourself into the sea."  "Will nothing satisfy
you but my life?" said he.  "Take my gold, and welcome.  I
willingly buy my life at that price."  "No, no; we cannot spare
you.  Your life will be too dangerous to us.  Where could we go
to escape from Periander, if he should know that you had been
robbed by us?  Your gold would be of little use to us, if, on
returning home, we could never more be free from fear." "Grant
me, then," said he, "a last request, since nought will avail to
save my life, that I may die as I have lived, as becomes a bard.
When I shall have sung my death-song, and my harp-strings shall
cease to vibrate, then I will bid farewell to life, and yield
uncomplaining to my fate."  This prayer, like the others, would
have been unheeded,   they thought only of their booty,   but to
hear so famous a musician, that moved their rude hearts.  "Suffer
me," he added, "to arrange my dress.  Apollo will not favor me
unless I be clad in my minstrel garb."

He clothed his well-proportioned limbs in gold and purple fair to
see, his tunic fell around him in graceful folds, jewels adorned
his arms, his brow was crowned with a golden wreath, and over his
neck and shoulders flowed his hair perfumed with odors.  His left
hand held the lyre, his right the ivory wand with which he struck
its chords.  Like one inspired, he seemed to drink the morning
air and glitter in the morning ray.  The seamen gazed with
admiration.  He strode forward to the vessel's side and looked
down into the blue sea.  Addressing his lyre, he sang, "Companion
of my voice, come with me to the realm of shades.  Though
Cerberus may growl, we know the power of song can tame his rage.
Ye heroes of Elysium, who have passed the darkling flood,   ye
happy souls, soon shall I join your band.  Yet can ye relieve my
grief?  Alas, I leave my friend behind me.  Thou, who didst find
thy Eurydice, and lose her again as soon as found; when she had
vanished like a dream, how didst thou hate the cheerful light!  I
must away, but I will not fear.  The gods look down upon us.  Ye
who slay me unoffending, when I am no more, your time of
trembling shall come.  Ye Nereids, receive your guest, who throws
himself upon your mercy!"  So saying, he sprang into the deep
sea.  The waves covered him, and the seamen held on their way,
fancying themselves safe from all danger of detection.

But the strains of his music had drawn round him the inhabitants
of the deep to listen, and dolphins followed the ship as if
chained by a spell.  While he struggled in the waves, a dolphin
offered him his back, and carried him mounted thereon safe to
shore.  At the spot where he landed, a monument of brass was
afterwards erected upon the rocky shore, to preserve the memory
of the event.

When Arion and the dolphin parted, each to his own element, Arion
thus poured forth his thanks.  "Farewell, thou faithful, friendly
fish!  Would that I could reward thee; but thou canst not wend
with me, nor I with thee.  Companionship we may not have.  May
Galatea, queen of the deep, accord thee her favor, and thou,
proud of the burden, draw her chariot over the smooth mirror of
the deep."

Arion hastened from the shore, and soon saw before him the towers
of Corinth.  He journeyed on, harp in hand, singing as he went,
full of love and happiness, forgetting his losses, and mindful
only of what remained, his friend and his lyre.  He entered the
hospitable halls, and was soon clasped in the embrace of
Periander.  "I come back to thee, my friend," he said.  "The
talent which a god bestowed has been the delight of thousands,
but false knaves have stripped me of my well-earned treasure; yet
I retain the consciousness of wide-spread fame."  Then he told
Periander all the wonderful events that had befallen him, who
heard him with amazement.  "Shall such wickedness triumph?" said
he.  "Then in vain is power lodged in my hands.  That we may
discover the criminals, you must remain here in concealment, and
so they will approach without suspicion."  When the ship arrived
in the harbor, he summoned the mariners before him.  "Have you
heard anything of Arion?" he inquired.  "I anxiously look for his
return." They replied, "We left him well and prosperous in
Tarentum."  As they said these words, Arion stepped forth and
faced them.  His well proportioned limbs were arrayed in gold and
purple fair to see, his tunic fell around him in graceful folds,
jewels adorned his arms, his brow was crowned with a golden
wreath, and over his neck and shoulders flowed his hair perfumed
with odors; his left hand held the lyre, his right the ivory wand
with which he struck its chords.  They fell prostrate at his
feet, as if a lightning bolt had struck them.  "We meant to
murder him, and he has become a god.  O Earth, open and receive
us!"  Then Periander spoke.  "He lives, the master of the lay!
Kind Heaven protects the poet's life.  As for you, I invoke not
the spirit of vengeance; Arion wishes not your blood.  Ye slaves
of avarice, begone!  Seek some barbarous land, and never may
aught beautiful delight your souls!"

Spencer represents Arion, mounted on his dolphin, accompanying
the train of Neptune and Amphitrite:

"Then was there heard a most celestial sound
Of dainty music which did next ensue,
And, on the floating waters as enthroned,
Arion with his harp unto him drew
The ears and hearts of all that goodly crew;
Even when as yet the dolphin which him bore
Through the Aegean Seas from pirates' view,
Stood still, by him astonished at his love,
And all the raging seas for joy forgot to roar."

Byron, in his Childe Harold, Canto II., alludes to the story of
Arion, when, describing his voyage, he represents one of the
seamen making music to entertain the rest:

"The moon is up; by Heaven, a lovely eve!
Long streams of light o'er dancing waves expand;
Now lads on shore may sigh and maids believe;
Such be our fate when we return to land!
Meantime some rude Arion's restless hand
Wakes the brisk harmony that sailors love;
A circle there of merry listeners stand,
Or to some well-known measure featly move
Thoughtless as if on shore they still were free to rove."


IBYCUS

In order to understand the story of Ibycus which follows, it is
necessary to remember, first, that the theatres of the ancients
were immense buildings providing seats for from ten to thirty
thousand spectators, and as they were used only on festal
occasions, and admission was free to all, they were usually
filled.  They were without roofs and open to the sky, and the
performances were in the daytime.  Secondly, the appalling
representation of the Furies is not exaggerated in the story.  It
is recorded that AEschylus, the tragic poet, having on one
occasion represented the Furies in a chorus of fifty performers,
the terror of the spectators was such that many fainted and were
thrown into convulsions, and the magistrates forbade a like
representation for the future.

Ibycus, the pious poet, was on his way to the chariot races and
musical competitions held at the Isthmus of Corinth, which
attracted all of Grecian lineage.  Apollo had bestowed on him the
gift of song, the honeyed lips of the poet, and he pursued his
way with lightsome step, full of the god.  Already the towers of
Corinth crowning the height appeared in view, and he had entered
with pious awe the sacred grove of Neptune.  No living object was
in sight, only a flock of cranes flew overhead, taking the same
course as himself in their migration to a southern clime.  "Good
luck to you, ye friendly squadrons," he exclaimed, "my companions
from across the sea.  I take your company for a good omen.  We
come from far, and fly in search of hospitality.  May both of us
meet that kind reception which shields the stranger guest from
harm!"

He paced briskly on, and soon was in the middle of the wood.
There suddenly, at a narrow pass, two robbers stepped forth and
barred his way.  He must yield or fight.  But his hand,
accustomed to the lyre and not to the strife of arms, sank
powerless.  He called for help on men and gods, but his cry
reached no defender's ear.  "Then here must I die," said he, "in
a strange land, unlamented, cut off by the hand of outlaws, and
see none to avenge my cause."  Sore wounded he sank to the earth,
when hoarse screamed the cranes overhead.  "Take up my cause, ye
cranes," he said, "since no voice but yours answers to my cry."
So saying, he closed his eyes in death.

The body, despoiled and mangled, was found, and though disfigured
with wounds, was recognized by the friend in Corinth who had
expected him as a guest.  "Is it thus I find you restored to me?"
he exclaimed; "I who hoped to entwine your temples with the
wreath of triumph in the strife of song!"

The guests assembled at the festival heard the tidings with
dismay.  All Greece felt the wound, every heart owned its loss.
They crowded round the tribunal of the magistrates, and demanded
vengeance on the murderers and expiation with their blood.

But what trace or mark shall point out the perpetrator from
amidst the vast multitude attracted by the splendor of the feat?
Did he fall by the hands of robbers, or did some private enemy
slay him?  The all-discerning sun alone can tell, for no other
eye beheld it.  Yet not improbably the murderer even now walks in
the midst of the throng, and enjoys the fruits of his crime,
while vengeance seeks for him in vain.  Perhaps in their own
temple's enclosure he defies the gods, mingling freely in this
throng of men that now presses into the ampitheatre.

For now crowded together, row on row, the multitude fill the
seats till it seems as if the very fabric would give way.  The
murmur of voices sounds like the roar of the sea, while the
circles widening in their ascent rise, tier on tier, as if they
would reach the sky.

And now the vast assemblage listens to the awful voice of the
chorus personating the Furies, which in solemn guise advances
with measured step, and moves around the circuit of the theatre.
Can they be mortal women who compose that awful group, and can
that vast concourse of silent forms be living beings!

The choristers, clad in black, bore in their fleshless hands
torches blazing with a pitchy flame.  Their cheeks were
bloodless, and in place of hair, writing and swelling serpents
curled around their brows.  Forming a circle, these awful beings
sang their hymn, rending the hearts of the guilty, and enchaining
all their faculties.  It rose and swelled, overpowering the sound
of the instruments, stealing the judgment, palsying the heart,
curdling the blood.

"Happy the man who keeps his heart pure from guilt and crime!
Him we avengers touch not; he treads the path of life secure from
us.  But woe!  Woe!  To him who has done the deed of secret
murder.  We, the fearful family of Night, fasten ourselves upon
his whole being.  Thinks he by flight to escape us?  We fly still
faster in pursuit, twine our snakes around his feet and bring him
to the ground.  Unwearied we pursue; no pity checks our course;
still on and on to the end of life, we give him no peace nor
rest."  Thus the Eumenides sang, and moved in solemn cadence,
while stillness like the stillness of death sat over the whole
assembly as if in the presence of superhuman beings; and then in
solemn march completing the circuit of the theatre, they passed
out at the back of the stage.

Every heart fluttered between illusion and reality, and every
breast panted with undefined terror, quailing before the awful
power that watches secret crimes and winds unseen the skein of
destiny.  At that moment a cry burst forth from one of the
uppermost benches   "Look!  Look!  Comrade, yonder are the cranes
of Ibycus!"  And suddenly there appeared sailing across the sky a
dark object which a moment's inspection showed to be a flock of
cranes flying directly over the theatre.  "Of Ibycus! did he
say?"  The beloved name revived the sorrow in every breast.  As
wave follows wave over the face of the sea, so ran from mouth to
mouth the words, "Of Ibycus!  Him whom we all lament, with some
murderer's hand laid low!  What have the cranes to do with him?"
And louder grew the swell of voices, while like a lightning's
flash the thought sped through every heart, "Observe the power of
the Eumenides!  The pious poet shall be avenged!  The murderer
has informed against himself.  Seize the man who uttered that cry
and the other to whom he spoke!"

The culprit would gladly have recalled his words, but it was too
late.  The faces of the murderers pale with terror betrayed their
guilt.  The people took them before the judge, they confessed
their crime and suffered the punishment they deserved.


SIMONIDES

Simonides was one of the most prolific of the early poets of
Greece, but only a few fragments of his compositions have
descended to us.  He wrote hymns, triumphal odes, and elegies.
In the last species of composition he particularly excelled.  His
genius was inclined to the pathetic, and none could touch with
truer effect the chords of human sympathy.  The Lamentation of
Danae, the most important of the fragments which remain of his
poetry is based upon the tradition that Danae and her infant son
were confined by order of her father Acrisius in a chest and set
adrift on the sea.  The chest floated towards the island of
Seriphus, where both were rescued by Dictys, a fisherman, and
carried to Polydectes, king of the country, who received and
protected them.  The child Perseus when grown up became a famous
hero, whose adventures have been recorded in a previous chapter.

Simonides passed much of his life at the courts of princes, and
often employed his talents in panegyric and festal odes,
receiving his reward from the munificence of those whose exploits
he celebrated.  This employment was not derogatory, but closely
resembles that of the earliest bards, such as Demodocus,
described by Homer, or of Homer himself as recorded by tradition.

On one occasion when residing at the court of Scopas, king of
Thessaly, the prince desired him to prepare a poem in celebration
of his exploits, to be recited at a banquet.  In order to
diversify his theme, Simonides, who was celebrated for his piety,
introduced into his poem the exploits of Castor and Pollux.  Such
digressions were not unusual with the poets on similar occasions,
and one might suppose an ordinary mortal might have been content
to share the praises of the sons of Leda.  But vanity is
exacting; and as Scopas sat at his festal board among his
courtiers and sycophants, he grudged every verse that did not
rehearse his own praises.  When Simonides approached to receive
the promised reward Scopas bestowed but half the expected sum,
saying, "Here is payment for my portion of the performance,
Castor and Pollux will doubtless compensate thee for so much as
relates to them."  The disconcerted poet returned to his seat
amidst the laughter which followed the great man's jest.  In a
little time he received a message that two young men on horseback
were waiting without and anxious to see him.  Simonides hastened
to the door, but looked in vain for the visitors.  Scarcely
however had he left the banqueting-hall when the roof fell in
with a loud crash, burying Scopas and all his guests beneath the
ruins.  On inquiring as to the appearance of the young men who
had sent for him, Simonides was satisfied that they were no other
than Castor and Pollux themselves.


Sappho

Sappho was a poetess who flourished in a very early age of Greek
literature.  Of her works few fragments remain, but they are
enough to establish her claim to eminent poetical genius.  The
story of Sappho commonly alluded to is that she was passionately
in love with a beautiful youth named Phaon, and failing to obtain
a return of affection she threw herself from the promontory of
Leucadia into the sea, under a superstition that those who should
take that "Lover's-leap," would, if not destroyed, be cured of
their love.

Byron alludes to the story of Sappho in Childe Harold, Canto II.:


Those who wish to know more of Sappho and her leap, are referred
to the Spectator, Nos. 223 and 229, and also to Moore's Evenings
in Greece.




Chapter XIX
Endymion.   Orion.   Aurora and Tithonus.   Acis and Galatea

Endymion was a beautiful youth who fed his flock on Mount Latmos.
One calm, clear night, Diana, the Moon, looked down and saw him
sleeping.  The cold heart of the virgin goddess was warmed by his
surpassing beauty, and she came down to him, kissed him, and
watched over him while he slept.

Another story was that Jupiter bestowed on him the gift of
perpetual youth united with perpetual sleep.  Of one so gifted we
can have but few adventures to record.  Diana, it was said, took
care that his fortunes should not suffer by his inactive life,
for she made his flock increase, and guarded his sheep and lambs
from the wild beasts.

The story of Endymion has a peculiar charm from the human meaning
which it so thinly veils.  We see in Endymion the young poet, his
fancy and his heart seeking in vain for that which can satisfy
them, finding his favorite hour in the quiet moonlight, and
nursing there beneath the beams of the bright and silent witness
the melancholy and the ardor which consumes him.  The story
suggests aspiring and poetic love, a life spent more in dreams
than in reality, and an early and welcome death.
S. G. Bulfinch

The Endymion of Keats is a wild and fanciful poem, containing
some exquisite poetry, as this, to the moon:

"The sleeping kine
Couched in thy brightness dream of fields divine.
Innumerable mountains rise, and rise,
Ambitious for the hallowing of thine eyes,
And yet thy benediction passeth not
One obscure hiding place, one little spot
Where pleasure may be sent; the nested wren
Has thy fair face within its tranquil ken."

Dr. Young in the Night Thoughts alludes to Endymion thus:

"These thoughts, O Night, are thine;
>From thee they came like lovers' secret sighs,
While others slept.  So Cynthia, poets feign,
In shadows veiled, soft, sliding from her sphere,
Her shepherd cheered, of her enamored less
Than I of thee."

Fletcher, in the Faithful Shepherdess, tells,

"How the pale Phoebe, hunting in a grove,
First saw the boy Endymion, from whose eyes
She took eternal fire that never dies;
How she conveyed him softly in a sleep,
His temples bound with poppy, to the steep
Head of Old Latmos, where she stoops each night,
Gilding the mountain with her brother's light,
To kiss her sweetest."


ORION

Orion was the son of Neptune.  He was a handsome giant and a
mighty hunter.  His father gave him the power of wading through
the depths of the sea, or as others say, of walking on its
surface.

Orion loved Merope, the daughter of Oenopion, king of Chios, and
sought her in marriage.  He cleared the island of wild beasts,
and brought the spoils of the chase as presents to his beloved;
but as Oenopion constantly deferred his consent, Orion attempted
to gain possession of the maiden by violence.  Her father,
incensed at this conduct, having made Orion drunk, deprived him
of his sight, and cast him out on the sea shore.  The blinded
hero followed the sound of the Cyclops' hammer till he reached
Lemnos, and came to the forge of Vulcan, who, taking pity on him,
gave him Kedalion, one of his men, to be his guide to the abode
of the sun.  Placing Kedalion on his shoulders, Orion proceeded
to the east, and there meeting the sun-god, was restored to sight
by his beam.

After this he dwelt as a hunter with Diana, with whom he was a
favorite, and it is even said she was about to marry him.  Her
brother was highly displeased and often chid her, but to no
purpose.  One day, observing Orion wading though the sea with his
head just above the water, Apollo pointed it out to his sister
and maintained that she could not hit that black thing on the
sea.  The archer-goddess discharged a shaft with fatal aim.  The
waves rolled the dead body of Orion to the land, and bewailing
her fatal error with many tears, Diana placed him among the
stars, where he appears as a giant, with a girdle, sword, lion's
skin, and club.  Sirius, his dog, follows him, and the Pleiads
fly before him.

The Pleiads were daughters of Atlas, and nymphs of Diana's train.
One day Orion saw them, and became enamored, and pursued them.
In their distress they prayed to the gods to change their form,
and Jupiter in pity turned them into pigeons, and then made them
a constellation in the sky.  Though their numbers was seven, only
six stars are visible, for Electra, one of them, it is said, left
her place that she might not behold the ruin of Troy, for that
city was founded by her son Dardanus.  The sight had such an
effect on her sisters that they have looked pale ever since.

Mr. Longfellow has a poem on the "Occultation of Orion."  The
following lines are those in which he alludes to the mythic
story.  We must premise that on the celestial globe Orion is
represented as robed in a lion's skin and wielding a club.  At
the moment the stars of the constellation one by one were
quenched in the light of the moon, the poet tells us,

"Down fell the red skin of the lion
Into the river at his feet.
His mighty club no longer beat
The forehead of the bull; but he
Reeled as of yore beside the sea,
When blinded by Oenopion
He sought the blacksmith at his forge,
And climbing up the narrow gorge,
Fixed his blank eyes upon the sun."

Tennyson has a different theory of the Pleiads:

"Many a night I saw the Pleiads, rising through the mellow shade,
Glitter like a swarm of fire-flies tangled in a silver braid."
Locksley Hall

Byron alludes to the lost Pleiad:

"Like the lost Pleiad seen no more below."

See also Mrs. Heman's verses on the same subject.


AURORA AND TITHONUS.

Aurora, the goddess of the Dawn, like her sister the Moon, was at
times inspired with the love of mortals.  Her greatest favorite
was Tithonus, son of Laomedon, king of Troy.  She stole him away,
and prevailed on Jupiter to grant him immortality; but forgetting
to have youth joined in the gift, after some time she began to
discern, to her great mortification, that he was growing old.
When his hair was quite white she left his society; but he still
had the range of her palace, lived on ambrosial food, and was
clad in celestial raiment.  At length he lost the power of using
his limbs, and then she shut him up in his chamber, whence his
feeble voice might at times be heard.  Finally she turned him
into a grasshopper.

Memnon was the son of aurora and Tithonus.  He was king of the
AEthiopians, and dwelt in the extreme east, on the shore of
Ocean.  He came with his warriors to assist the kindred of his
father in the war of Troy.  King Priam received him with great
honors, and listened with admiration to his narrative of the
wonders of the ocean shore.

The very day after his arrival, Memnon, impatient of repose, led
his troops to the field.  Antilochus, the brave son of Nestor,
fell by his hand, and the Greeks were put to flight, when
Achilles appeared and restored the battle.  A long and doubtful
contest ensued between him and the son of Aurora; at length
victor declared for Achilles, Memnon fell, and the Trojans fled
in dismay.

Aurora, who, from her station in the sky, had viewed with
apprehension the danger of her son, when she saw him fall
directed his brothers, the Winds, to convey his body to the banks
of the river Esepus in Paphlagonia.  In the evening Aurora came,
accompanied by the Hours and the Pleiads, and wept and lamented
over her son.  Night, in sympathy with her grief, spread the
heaven with clouds; all nature mourned for the offspring of the
Dawn.  The Aethiopians raised his tomb on the banks of the stream
in the grove of the nymphs, and Jupiter caused the sparks and
cinders of his funeral-pile to be turned into birds, which,
dividing into two flocks, fought over the pile till they fell
into the flame.  Every year, at the anniversary of his death,
they return and celebrate his obsequies in like manner.  Aurora
remains inconsolable for the loss of her son.  Her tears still
flow, and may be seen at early morning in the form of dew-drops
on the grass.

Unlike most of the marvels of ancient mythology, there will exist
some memorials of this.  On the banks of the river Nile, in
Egypt, are two colossal statues, one of which is said to be the
statue of Memnon.  Ancient writers record that when the first
rays of the rising sun fall upon this statue, a sound is heard to
issue from it which they compare to the snapping of a harp-
string.  There is some doubt about the identification of the
existing statue with the one described by the ancients, and the
mysterious sounds are still more doubtful.  Yet there are not
wanting some modern testimonies to their being still audible.  It
has been suggested that sounds produced by confined air making
its escape from crevices or caverns in the rocks may have given
some ground for the story.  Sir Gardner Wilkinson, a late
traveller, of the highest authority, examined the statue itself,
and discovered that it was hollow, and that "in the lap of the
statue is a stone, which, on being struck, emits a metallic
sound, that might still be made use of to deceive a visitor who
was predisposed to believe its powers."

The vocal statue of Memnon is a favorite subject of allusion with
the poets.  Darwin, in his Botanic Garden, says,

"So to the sacred Sun in Memnon's fane
Spontaneous concords choired the matin strain;
Touched by his orient beam responsive rings
The living lyre and vibrates all its strings;
Accordant aisles the tender tones prolong,
And holy echoes swell the adoring song."


ACIS AND GALATEA

Scylla was a fair virgin of Sicily, a favorite of the Sea-Nymphs.
She had many suitors, but repelled them all, and would go to the
grotto of Galatea, and tell her how she was persecuted.  One day
the goddess, while Scylla dressed her hair, listened to the
story, and then replied, "Yet, maiden, your persecutors are of
the not ungentle race of men, whom if you will you can repel; but
I, the daughter of Nereus, and protected by such a band of
sisters, found no escape from the passion of the Cyclops but in
the depths of the sea;" and tears stopped her utterance, which
when the pitying maiden had wiped away with her delicate finger,
and soothed the goddess, "Tell me, dearest," said she, "the cause
of your grief."  Galatea then said, "Acis was the son of Faunus
and a Naiad.  His father and mother loved him dearly, but their
love was not equal to mine.  For the beautiful youth attached
himself to me alone, and he was just sixteen years old, the down
just beginning to darken his cheeks.  As much as I sought his
society, so much did the cyclops seek mine; and if you ask me
whether my love for Acis or my hatred for Polyphemus was the
stronger, I cannot tell you; they were in equal measure.  Oh,
Venus, how great is thy power!  This fierce giant, the terror of
the woods, whom no hapless stranger escaped unharmed, who defied
even Jove himself, learned to feel what love was, and touched
with a passion for me, forgot his flocks and his well-stored
caverns.  Then, for the first time, he began to take some care of
his appearance, and to try to make himself agreeable; he harrowed
those coarse locks of his with a comb, and mowed his beard with a
sickle, looked at his harsh features in the water, and composed
his countenance.  His love of slaughter, his fierceness and
thirst of blood prevailed no more, and ships that touched at his
island went away in safety.   He paced up and down the sea-shore,
imprinting huge tracks with his heavy tread, and, when weary, lay
tranquilly in his cave.

"There is a cliff which projects into the sea, which washes it on
either side.  Thither one day the huge Cyclops ascended, and sat
down while his flocks spread themselves around.  Laying down his
staff which would have served for a mast to hold a vessel's sail,
and taking his instrument, compacted of numerous pipes, he made
the hills and the waters echo the music of his song.  I lay hid
under a rock, by the side of my beloved Acis, and listened to the
distant strain.  It was full of extravagant praises of my beauty,
mingled with passionate reproaches of my coldness and cruelty.

"When he had finished he rose up, and like a raging bull, that
cannot stand still, wandered off into the woods.  Acis and I
thought no more of him, till on a sudden he came to a spot which
gave him a view of us as we sat.  'I see you,' he exclaimed, 'and
I will make this the last of your love-meetings.'  His voice was
a roar such as an angry Cyclops alone could utter.  AEtna
trembled at the sound.  I, overcome with terror, plunged into the
water.  Acis turned and fled, crying, 'Save me, Galatea, save me,
my parents!"  The Cyclops pursued him, and tearing a rock from
the side of the mountain hurled it at him.  Though only a corner
of it touched him it overwhelmed him.

"All that fate left in my power I did for Acis.  I endowed him
with the honors of his grandfather the river-god.   The purple
blood flowed out from under the rock, but by degrees grew paler
and looked like the stream of a river rendered turbid by rains,
and in time it became clear.  The rock cleaved open, and the
water, as it gushed from the chasm, uttered a pleasing murmur."

Thus Acis was changed into a river, and the river retains the
name of Acis.


Chapter XX
The Trojan War

Minerva was the goddess of wisdom, but on one occasion she did a
very foolish thing; she entered into competition with Juno and
Venus for the prize of beauty.  It happened thus.  At the
nuptials of Peleus and Thetis all the gods were invited with the
exception of Eris, or Discord.  Enraged at her exclusion, the
goddess threw a golden apple among the guests with the
inscription, "For the most beautiful."  Thereupon Juno, Venus,
and Minerva, each claimed the apple.  Jupiter not willing to
decide in so delicate a matter, sent the goddesses to Mount Ida,
where the beautiful shepherd Paris was tending his flocks, and to
him was committed the decision.  The goddesses accordingly
appeared before him.  Juno promised him power and riches, Minerva
glory and renown in war, and Venus the fairest of women for his
wife, each attempting to bias his decision in her own favor.
Paris decided in favor of Venus and gave her the golden apple,
thus making the two other goddesses his enemies.  Under the
protection of Venus, Paris sailed to Greece, and was hospitably
received by Menelaus, king of Sparta.  Now Helen, the wife of
Menelaus, was the very woman whom Venus had destined for Paris,
the fairest of her sex.  She had been sought as a bride by
numerous suitors, and before her decision was made known, they
all, at the suggestion of Ulysses, one of their number, took an
oath that they would defend her from all injury and avenge her
cause if necessary.  She chose Menelaus, and was living with him
happily when Paris became their guest.  Paris, aided by Venus,
persuaded her to slope with him, and carried her to Troy, whence
arose the famous Trojan war, the theme of the greatest poems of
antiquity, those of Homer and Virgil.

Menelaus called upon his brother chieftains of Greece to fulfil
their pledge, and join him in his efforts to recover his wife.
They generally came forward, but Ulysses, who had married
Penelope and was very happy in his wife and child, had no
disposition to embark in such a troublesome affair.  He therefore
hung back and Palamedes was sent to urge him.  When Palamedes
arrived at Ithaca, Ulysses pretended to be mad.  He yoked an ass
and an ox together to the plough and began to sow salt.
Palamedes, to try him, placed the infant Telemachus before the
plough, whereupon the father turned the plough aside, showing
plainly that he was no madman, and after that could no longer
refuse to fulfil his promise.  Being now himself gained for the
undertaking, he lent his aid to bring in other reluctant chiefs,
especially Achilles.  This hero was the son of that Thetis at
whose marriage the apple of Discord had been thrown among the
goddesses.  Thetis was herself one of the immortals, a sea-nymph,
and knowing that her son was fated to perish before Troy if he
went on the expedition, she endeavored to prevent his going.  She
sent him away to the court of king Lycomedes, and induced him to
conceal himself in the disguise of a maiden among the daughters
of the king.  Ulysses, hearing he was there, went disguised as a
merchant to the palace and offered for sale female ornaments,
among which he had placed some arms.  While the king's daughters
were engrossed with the other contents of the merchant's pack,
Achilles handled the weapons and thereby betrayed himself to the
keen eye of Ulysses, who found no great difficulty in persuading
him to disregard his mother's prudent counsels and join his
countrymen in the war.

Priam was king of Troy, and Paris, the shepherd and seducer of
Helen, was his son.  Paris had been brought up in obscurity,
because there were certain ominous forebodings connected with him
from his infancy that he would be the ruin of the state.  These
forebodings seemed at length likely to be realized, for the
Grecian armament now in preparation was the greatest that had
ever been fitted out.  Agamemnon, king of Mycenae, and brother of
the injured Menelaus, was chosen commander-in-chief.  Achilles
was their most illustrious warrior.  After him ranked Ajax,
gigantic in size and of great courage, but dull of intellect,
Diomedes, second only to Achilles in all the qualities of a hero,
Ulysses, famous for his sagacity, and Nestor, the oldest of the
Grecian chiefs, and one to whom they all looked up for counsel.
But Troy was no feeble enemy.  Priam, the king, was now old, but
he had been a wise prince and had strengthened his state by good
government at home and numerous alliances with his neighbors.
But the principal stay and support of his throne was his son
Hector, one of the noblest characters painted by heathen
antiquity.  Hector felt, from the first, a presentiment of the
fall of his country, but still persevered in his heroic
resistance, yet by no means justified the wrong which brought
this danger upon her.  He was united in marriage with Andromache,
and as a husband and father his character was not less admirable
than as a warrior.  The principal leaders on the side of the
Trojans, besides Hector, were Aeneas and Deiphobus, Glaucus and
Sarpedon.

After two years of preparation the Greek fleet and army assembled
in the port of Aulis in Boeotia.  Here Agamemnon in hunting
killed a stag which was sacred to Diana, and the goddess in
return visited the army with pestilence, and produced a calm
which prevented the ships from leaving the port.  Calchas the
soothsayer thereupon announced that the wrath of the virgin
goddess could only be appeased by the sacrifice of a virgin on
her altar, and that none other but the daughter of the offender
would be acceptable.  Agamemnon, however reluctant, yielded his
consent, and the maiden Iphigenia was sent for under the pretence
that she was to be married to Achilles.  When she was about to be
sacrificed the goddess relented and snatched her away, leaving a
hind in her place, and Iphigenia enveloped in a cloud was carried
to Tauris, where Diana made her priestess of her temple.

Tennyson, in his Dream of Fair women, makes Iphigenia thus
describe her feelings at the moment of sacrifice, the moment
represented in our engraving:

"I was cut off from hope in that sad place,
Which yet to name my spirit loathes and fears;
My father held his hand upon his face;
I, blinded by my tears,

"Still strove to speak; my voice was thick with sighs,
As in a dream.  Dimly I could descry
The stern black-bearded kings, with wolfish eyes,
Waiting to see me die.

"The tall masts quivered as they lay afloat,
The temples and the people and the shore;
One drew a sharp knife through my tender throat
Slowly, and    nothing more."

The wind now proving fair the fleet made sail and brought the
forces to the coast of Troy.  The Trojans came to oppose their
landing, and at the first onset Protesilaus fell by the hand of
Hector.  Protesilaus had left at home his wife Laodamia, who was
most tenderly attached to him.  When the news of his death
reached her she implored the gods to be allowed to converse with
him only three hours.  The request was granted.  Mercury led
Protesilaus back to the upper world, and when he died a second
time Laodamia died with him.  There was a story that the nymphs
panted elm trees round his grave which grew very well till they
were high enough to command a view of Troy, and then withered
away, while fresh branches sprang from the roots.

Wordsworth has taken the story of Protesilaus and Laodamia for
the subject of a poem.  It seems the oracle had declared that
victory should be the lot of that party from which should fall
the first victim to the war.  The poet represents Protesilaus, on
his brief return to earth, as relating to Laodamia the story of
his fate:

"The wished-for wind was given; I then revolved
The oracle, upon the silent sea;
And if no worthier led the way, resolved
That of a thousand vessels mine should be
The foremost prow impressing to the strand,
Mine the first blood that tinged the Trojan sand.

"Yet bitter, ofttimes bitter was the pang
When of thy loss I thought, beloved wife!
On thee too fondly did my memory hang,
And on the joys we shared in mortal life,
The paths which we had trod,   these fountains, flowers;
My new planned cities and unfinished towers.

"But should suspense permit the foe to cry,
'Behold they tremble!  Haughty their array,
Yet of their number no one dares to die!'"
In soul I swept the indignity away;
Old frailties then recurred; but lofty thought
In act embodied my deliverance wrought.
. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .
Upon the side
Of Hellespont (such faith was entertained)
A knot of spiry trees for ages grew
>From out the tomb of him for whom she died;
And ever when such stature they had gained
That Ilium's walls were subject to their view,
The trees' tall summits withered at the sight,
A constant interchange of growth and blight!"


THE ILIAD

The war continued without decisive results for nine years.  Then
an event occurred which seemed likely to be fatal to the cause of
the Greeks, and that was a quarrel between Achilles and
Agamemnon.  It is at this point that the great poem of Homer, the
Iliad, begins.  The Greeks, though unsuccessful against Troy, had
taken the neighboring and allied cities, and in the division of
the spoil a female captive, by name Chryseis, daughter of
Chryses, priest of Apollo, had fallen to the share of Agamemnon.
Chryses came bearing the sacred emblems of his office, and begged
the release of his daughter.  Agamemnon refused.  Thereupon
Chryses implored Apollo to afflict the Greeks till they should be
forced to yield their prey.  Apollo granted the prayer of his
priest, and sent pestilence into the Grecian camp.  Then a
council was called to deliberate how to allay the wrath of the
gods and avert the plague.  Achilles boldly charged their
misfortunes upon Agamemnon as caused by his withholding Chryseis.
Agamemnon enraged, consented to relinquish his captive, but
demanded that Achilles should yield to him in her stead Briseis,
a maiden who had fallen to Achilles' share in the division of the
spoil.  Achilles submitted, but forthwith declared that he would
take no further part in the war.  He withdrew his forces from the
general camp and openly avowed his intention of returning home to
Greece.

The gods and goddesses interested themselves as much in this
famous war as the parties themselves.  It was well known to them
that fate had decreed that Troy should fall, at last, if her
enemies should persevere and not voluntarily abandon the
enterprise.  Yet there was room enough left for chance to excite
by turns the hopes and fears of the powers above who took part
with either side.  Juno and Minerva, in consequence of the slight
put upon their charms by Paris, were hostile to the Trojans;
Venus for the opposite cause favored them.  Venus enlisted her
admirer Mars on the same side, but Neptune favored the Greeks.
Apollo was neutral, sometimes taking one side, sometimes the
other, and Jove himself, though he loved the good King Priam, yet
exercised a degree of impartiality; not however without
exceptions.

Thetis, the mother of Achilles, warmly resented the injury done
to her son.  She repaired immediately to Jove's palace, and
besought him to make the Greeks repent of their injustice to
Achilles by granting success to the Trojan arms.  Jupiter
consented; and in the battle which ensued the Trojans were
completely successful.  The Greeks were driven from the field,
and took refuge in their ships.  Then Agamemnon called a council
of his wisest and bravest chiefs.  Nestor advised that an embassy
should be sent to Achilles to persuade him to return to the
field; that Agamemnon should yield the maiden, the cause of the
dispute, with ample gifts to atone for the wrong he had done.
Agamemnon consented, and Ulysses, Ajax, and Phoenix were sent to
carry to Achilles the penitent message.  They performed that
duty, but Achilles was deaf to their entreaties.  He positively
refused to return to the field, and persisted in his resolution
to embark for Greece without delay.  The Greeks had constructed a
rampart around their ships, and now, instead of besieging Troy,
they were in a manner besieged themselves within their rampart.
The next day after the unsuccessful embassy to Achilles, a battle
was fought, and the Trojans, favored by Jove, were successful,
and succeeded in forcing a passage through the Grecian rampart,
and were about to set fire to the ships.  Neptune, seeing the
Greeks so pressed, came to their rescue.  He appeared in the form
of Calchas the prophet, encouraged the warriors with his shouts,
and appealed to each individually till he raised their ardor to
such a pitch that they forced the Trojans to give way.  Ajax
performed prodigies of valor, and at length encountered Hector.
Ajax shouted defiance, to which Hector replied, and hurled his
lance at the huge warrior.  It was well aimed, and struck Ajax
where the belts that bore his sword and shield crossed each other
on the breast.  The double guard prevented its penetrating, and
it fell harmless.  Then Ajax, seeing a huge stone, one of those
that served to prop the ships, hurled it at Hector.  It struck
him in the neck and stretched him on the plain.  His followers
instantly seized him, and bore him off stunned and wounded.

While Neptune was thus aiding the Greeks and driving back the
Trojans, Jupiter saw nothing of what was going on, for his
attention had been drawn from the field by the wiles of Juno.
That goddess had arrayed herself in all her charms, and, to crown
all, had borrowed of Venus her girdle called Cestus, which had
the effect to heighten the wearer's charms to such a degree that
they were quite irresistible.  So prepared, Juno went to join her
husband, who sat on Olympus watching the battle.  When he beheld
her she looked so charming that the fondness of his early love
revived, and, forgetting the contending armies and all other
affairs of state, he thought only of her and let the battle go as
it would.

But this absorption did not continue long, and when, upon turning
his eyes downward, he beheld Hector stretched on the plain almost
lifeless from pain and bruises, he dismissed Juno in a rage,
commanding her to send Iris and Apollo to him.  When Iris came he
sent her with a stern message to Neptune, ordering him instantly
to quit the field.  Apollo was dispatched to heal Hector's
bruises and to inspirit his heart.  These orders were obeyed with
such speed that while the battle still raged, Hector returned to
the field and Neptune betook himself to his own dominions.

An arrow from Paris's bow wounded Machaon, son of Aesculapius,
who inherited his father's art of healing, and was therefore of
great value to the Greeks as their surgeon, besides being one of
their bravest warriors.  Nestor took Machaon in his chariot and
conveyed him from the field.  As they passed the ships of
Achilles, that hero, looking out over the field, saw the chariot
of Nestor and recognized the old chief, but could not discern who
the wounded chief was.  So calling Patroclus, his companion and
dearest friend, he sent him to Nestor's tent to inquire.

Patroclus, arriving at Nestor's tent, saw Machaon wounded, and
having told the cause of his coming would have hastened away, but
Nestor detained him, to tell him the extent of the Grecian
calamities.  He reminded him also how, at the time of departing
for Troy, Achilles and himself had been charged by their
respective fathers with different advice; Achilles to aspire to
the highest pitch of glory, Patroclus, as the elder, to keep
watch over his friend, and to guide his inexperience.  "Now,"
said Nestor, "is the time for such influence.  If the gods so
please, thou mayest win him back to the common cause; but if not
let hm at least send his soldiers to the field, and come thou,
Patroclus, clad in his armor, and perhaps the very sight of it
may drive back the Trojans."

Patroclus was strongly moved with this address, and hastened back
to Achilles, revolving in his mind all he had seen and heard.  He
told the prince the sad condition of affairs at the camp of their
late associates; Diomedes, Ulysses, Agamemnon, Machaon, all
wounded, the rampart broken down, the enemy among the ships
preparing to burn them, and thus to cut off all means of return
to Greece.  While they spoke the flames burst forth from one of
the ships.  Achilles, at the sight, relented so far as to grant
Patroclus his request to lead the Myrmidons (for so were
Achilles' soldiers called) to the field, and to lend him his
armor that he might thereby strike more terror into the minds of
the Trojans.  Without delay the soldiers were marshalled,
Patroclus put on the radiant armor and mounted the chariot of
Achilles, and led forth the men ardent for battle.  But before he
went, Achilles strictly charged him that he should be content
with repelling the foe.  "Seek not," said he, "to press the
Trojans without me, lest thou add still more to the disgrace
already mine."  Then exhorting the troops to do their best he
dismissed them full of ardor to the fight.

Patroclus and his Myrmidons at once plunged into the contest
where it raged hottest; at the sight of which the joyful Grecians
shouted and the ships reechoed the acclaim.  The Trojans, at the
sight of the well-known armor, struck with terror, looked every
where for refuge.  First those who had got possession of the ship
and set it on fire left and allowed the Grecians to retake it and
extinguish the flames.  Then the rest of the Trojans fled in
dismay.  Ajax, Menelaus, and the two sons of Nestor performed
prodigies of valor.  Hector was forced to turn his horses' heads
and retire from the enclosure, leaving his men entangled in the
fosse to escape as they could.  Patroclus drove them before him,
slaying many, none daring to make a stand against him.

At last Sarpedon, son of Jove, ventured to oppose himself in
fight to Patroclus.  Jupiter looked down upon him and would have
snatched him from the fate which awaited him, but Juno hinted
that if he did so it would induce all others of the inhabitants
of heaven to interpose in like manner whenever any of their
offspring were endangered; to which reason Jove yielded.
Sarpedon threw his spear but missed Patroclus, but Patroclus
threw his with better success.  It pierced Sarpedon's breast and
he fell, and, calling to his friends to save his body from the
foe, expired.  Then a furious contest arose for the possession of
the corpse.  The Greeks succeeded and stripped Sarpedon of his
armor; but Jove would not allow the remains of his son to be
dishonored, and by his command Apollo snatched from the midst of
the combatants the body of Sarpedon and committed it to the care
of the twin brothers Death and Sleep, by whom it was transported
to Lycia, the native land of Sarpedon, where it received due
funeral rites.

Thus far Patroclus had succeeded to his utmost wish in repelling
the Trojans and relieving his countrymen, but now came a change
of fortune.  Hector, borne in his chariot, confronted him.
Patroclus threw a vast stone at Hector, which missed its aim, but
smote Cebriones, the charioteer, and knocked him from the car.
Hector leaped from the chariot to rescue his friend, and
Patroclus also decended to complete his victory.  Thus the two
heroes met face to face.  At this decisive moment the poet, as if
reluctant to give Hector the glory, records that Phoebus took
part against Patroclus.  He struck the helmet from his head and
the lance from his hand.  At the same moment an obscure Trojan
wounded him in the back, and Hector pressing forward pierced him
with his spear.  He fell mortally wounded.

Then arose a tremendous conflict for the body of Patroclus, but
his armor was at once taken possession of by Hector, who,
retiring a short distance, divested himself of his own armor and
put on that of Achilles, then returned to the fight.  Ajax and
Menelaus defended the body, and Hector and his bravest warriors
struggled to capture it.  The battle raged with equal fortune,
when Jove enveloped the whole face of heaven with a dark cloud.
The lightning flashed, the thunder roared, and Ajax, looking
round for some one whom he might dispatch to Achilles to tell him
of the death of his friend and of the imminent danger that his
remains would fall into the hands of the enemy, could see no
suitable messenger.  It was then that he exclaimed in those
famous lines so often quoted,

"Father of heaven and earth!  Deliver thou
Achaia's host from darkness; clear the skies;
Give day; and, since thy sovereign will is such,
Destruction with it; but, oh, give us day."
Cowper.

Or, as rendered by Pope,

"Lord of earth and air!
Oh, king!  Oh, father!  Hear my humble prayer!
Dispel this cloud, the light of heaven restore;
Give me to see and Ajax asks no more;
If Greece must perish we thy will obey
But let us perish in the face of day."

 Jupiter heard the prayer and dispersed the clouds.  Then Ajax
sent Antilochus to Achilles with the intelligence of Patroclus's
death, and of the conflict raging for his remains.  The Greeks at
last succeeded in bearing off the body to the ships, closely
pursued by Hector and Aeneas and rest of the Trojans.

Achilles heard the fate of his friend with such distress that
Antilochus feared for a while that he would destroy himself.  His
groans reached the ears of his mother, Thetis, far down in the
deeps of ocean where she abode, and she hastened to him to
inquire the cause.  She found him overwhelmed with self-reproach
that he had indulged his resentment so far, and suffered his
friend to fall a victim to it.  But his only consolation was the
hope of revenge.  He would fly instantly in search of Hector.
But his mother reminded him that he was now without armor, and
promised him, if he would but wait till the morrow, she would
procure for him a suit of armor from Vulcan more than equal to
that he had lost.  He consented, and Thetis immediately repaired
to Vulcan's palace.  She found him busy at his forge making
tripods for his own use, so artfully constructed that they moved
forward of their own accord when wanted, and retired again when
dismissed.  On hearing the request of Thetis, Vulcan immediately
laid aside his work and hastened to comply with her wishes.  He
fabricated a splendid suit of armor for Achilles, first a shield
adorned with elaborate devices, then a helmet crested with gold,
then a corslet and greaves of impenetrable temper, all perfectly
adapted to his form, and of consummate workmanship.  It was all
done in one night, and Thetis, receiving it, descended with it to
earth and laid it down at Achilles' feet at the dawn of day.

The first glow of pleasure that Achilles had felt since the death
of Petroclus was at the sight of this splendid armor.  And now
arrayed in it, he went forth into the camp, calling all the
chiefs to council.  When they were all assembled he addressed
them.  Renouncing his displeasure against Agamemnon and bitterly
lamenting the miseries that had resulted from it, he called on
them to proceed at once to the field.  Agamemnon made a suitable
reply, laying all the blame on Ate, the goddess of discord, and
thereupon complete reconcilement took place between the heroes.

Then Achilles went forth to battle, inspired with a rage and
thirst for vengeance that made him irresistible.  The bravest
warriors fled before him or fell by his lance.  Hector, cautioned
by Apollo, kept aloof, but the god, assuming the form of one of
Priam's sons, Lycaon, urged AEneas to encounter the terrible
warrior.  AEneas, though he felt himself unequal, did not decline
the combat.  He hurled his spear with all his force against the
shield, the work of Vulcan.  It was formed of five metal plates;
two were of brass, two of tin, and one of gold.  The spear
pierced two thicknesses, but was stopped in the third.  Achilles
threw his with better success.  It pierced through the shield of
Aeneas, but glanced near his shoulder and made no wound.  Then
AEneas seized a stone, such as two men of modern times could
hardly lift, and was about to throw it, and Achilles, with sword
drawn, was about to rush upon him, when Neptune, who looked out
upon the contest, moved with pity for AEneas, who he saw would
surely fall a victim if not speedily rescued, spread a cloud
between the combatants, and lifting AEneas from the ground, bore
him over the heads of warriors and steeds to the rear of the
battle.  Achilles, when the mist cleared away, looked round in
vain for his adversary, and acknowledging the prodigy, turned his
arms against other champions.  But none dared stand before him,
and Priam looking down from his city walls beheld his whole army
in full flight towards the city.  He gave command to open wide
the gates to receive the fugitives, and to shut them as soon as
the Trojans should have passed, lest the enemy should enter
likewise.  But Achilles was so close in pursuit that that would
have been impossible if Apollo had not, in the form of Agenor,
Priam's son, encountered Achilles for a while, then turned to
fly, and taken the way apart from the city.  Achilles pursued and
had chased his supposed victim far from the walls, when Apollo
disclosed himself, and Achilles, perceiving how he had been
deluded, gave up the chase.

But when the rest had escaped into the town Hector stood without,
determined to await the combat.  His old father called to him
from the walls and begged him to retire nor tempt the encounter.
His mother, Hecuba, also besought him to the same effect, but all
in vain.  "How can I," said he to himself, "by whose command the
people went to this day's contest, where so many have fallen,
seek safety for myself against a single foe?  But what if I offer
him to yield up Helen and all her treasures and ample of our own
beside?  Ah no!  It is too late.  He would not even hear me
through, but slay me while I spoke."   While he thus ruminated,
Achilles approached, terrible as Mars, his armor flashing
lighting as he moved.  At that sight Hector's heart failed him
and he fled.  Achilles swiftly pursued.  They ran, still keeping
near the walls, till they had thrice encircled the city.  As
often as Hector approached the walls Achilles intercepted him and
forced him to keep out in a wider circle.  But Apollo sustained
Hector's strength, and would not let him sink in weariness.  Then
Pallas, assuming the form of Deiphobus, Hector's bravest brother,
appeared suddenly at his side.  Hector saw him with delight, and,
thus strengthened, stopped his flight and turned to meet
Achilles.  Hector threw his spear, which struck the shield of
Achilles and bounded back.  He turned to receive another from the
hand of Deiphobus, but Deiphobus was gone.  Then Hector
understood his doom and said, "Alas!  It is plain this is my hour
to die!  I thought Deiphobus at hand, but Pallas deceived me, and
he is still in Troy.  But I will not fall inglorious."  So
saying, he drew his falchion from his side and rushed at once to
combat.  Achilles, secured behind his shield, waited the approach
of Hector.  When he came within reach of his spear, Achilles,
choosing with his eye a vulnerable part where the armor leaves
the neck uncovered, aimed his spear at that part, and Hector
fell, death-wounded, and feebly said, "Spare my body!  Let my
parents ransom it, and let me receive funeral rites from the sons
and daughters of Troy."  To which Achilles replied, "Dog, name
not ransom nor pity to me, on whom you have brought such dire
distress.  No!  Trust me, nought shall save thy carcass from the
dogs.  Though twenty ransoms and thy weight in gold were offered,
I would refuse it all."

So saying, he stripped the body of its armor, and fastening cords
to the feet, tied them behind his chariot, leaving the body to
trail along the ground.  Then mounting the chariot he lashed the
steeds, and so dragged the body to and fro before the city.  What
words can tell the grief of King Priam and Queen Hecuba at this
sight!  His people could scarce restrain the old king from
rushing forth.  He threw himself in the dust, and besought them
each by name to give him way.  Hecuba's distress was not less
violent.  The citizens stood round them weeping.  The sound of
the mourning reached the ears of Andromache, the wife of Hector,
as she sat among her maidens at work, and anticipating evil she
went forth to the wall.  When she saw the sight there presented,
she would have thrown herself headlong from the wall, but fainted
and fell into the arms of her maidens.  Recovering, she bewailed
her fate, picturing to herself her country ruined, herself a
captive, and her son dependent for his bread on the charity of
strangers.

When Achilles and the Greeks had taken their revenge on the
killer of Patroclus they busied themselves in paying due funeral
rites to their friend.  A pile was erected, and the body burned
with due solemnity; and then ensued games of strength and skill,
chariot races, wrestling, boxing, and archery.  Then the chiefs
sat down to the funeral banquet and after that retired to rest.
But Achilles neither partook of the feast nor of sleep.  The
recollection of his lost friend kept him awake, remembering their
companionship in toil and dangers, in battle or on the perilous
deep.  Before the earliest dawn he left his tent, and joining to
his chariot his swift steeds, he fastened Hector's body to be
dragged behind.  Twice he dragged him round the tomb of
Patroclus, leaving him at length stretched in the dust.  But
Apollo would not permit the body to be torn or disfigured with
all this abuse, but preserved it free from all taint or
defilement.

When Achilles indulged his wrath in thus disgracing brave Hector,
Jupiter in pity summoned Thetis to his presence.  He told her to
go to her son and prevail on him to restore the body of Hector to
his friends.  Then Jupiter sent Iris to King Priam to encourage
him to go to Achilles and beg the body of his son.  Iris
delivered her message, and Priam immediately prepared to obey.
He opened his treasures and took out rich garments and cloths,
with ten talents in gold and two splendid tripods and a golden
cup of matchless workmanship.  Then he called to his sons and
bade them draw forth his litter and place in it the various
articles designed for a ransom to Achilles.

When all was ready, the old king with a single companion, as aged
as himself, the herald Idaeus, drove forth from the gates,
parting there with Hecuba his queen, and all his friends, who
lamented him as going to certain death.

But Jupiter, beholding with compassion the venerable king, sent
Mercury to be his guide and protector.  Mercury, assuming the
form of a young warrior, presented himself to the aged couple,
and while at the sight of him they hesitated whether to fly or
yield, the god approached, and grasping Priam's hand, offered to
be their guide to Achilles' tent.  Priam gladly accepted his
offered service, and he, mounting the carriage, assumed the reins
and soon conveyed them to the tent of Achilles.  Mercury's wand
put to sleep all the guards, and without hindrance he introduced
Priam into the tent where Achilles sat, attended hy two of his
warriors.  The old king threw himself at the feet of Achilles and
kissed those terrible hands which had destroyed so many of his
sons.  "Think, O Achilles," he said, "of thy own father, full of
days like me, and trembling on the gloomy verge of life.  Perhaps
even now some neighbor chief oppresses him, and there is none at
hand to succor him in his distress.  Yet doubtless knowing that
Achilles lives he still rejoices, hoping that one day he shall
see thy face again.  But no comfort cheers me, whose bravest
sons, so late the flower of Ilium, all have fallen.  Yet one I
had, one more than all the rest the strength of my age, whom
fighting for his country, thou hast slain.  I come to redeem his
body, bringing inestimable ransom with me. Achilles, reverence
the gods!  Recollect thy father!  For his sake show compassion to
me!"  These words moved Achilles and he wept; remembering by
turns his absent father and his lost friend.  Moved with pity of
Priam's silver locks and beard, he raised him from the earth and
thus spake: "Priam, I know that thou has reached this place
conducted by some god, for without divine aid no mortal even in
the prime of youth had dared the attempt.  I grant thy request;
moved thereto by the evident will of Jove."  So saying he arose,
and went forth with his two friends, and unloaded of its charge
the litter, leaving two mantles and a robe for the covering of
the body, which they placed on the litter, and spread the
garments over it, that not unveiled it should be borne back to
Troy.  Then Achilles dismissed the old king with his attendants,
having first pledged himself to allow a truce of twelve days for
the funeral solemnities.

As the litter approached the city and was descried from the
walls, the people poured forth to gaze once more on the face of
their hero.   Foremost of all, the mother and the wife of Hector
came, and at the sight of the lifeless body renewed their
lamentations.  The people all wept with them, and to the going
down of the sun there was no pause or abatement of their grief.

The next day preparations were made for the funeral solemnities.
For nine days the people brought wood and built the pile, and on
the tenth they placed the body on the summit and applied the
torch; while all Troy, thronging forth, encompassed the pile.
When it had completely burned, they quenched the cinders with
wine, collected the bones and placed them in a golden urn, which
they buried in the earth, and reared a pile of stones over the
spot.

"Such honors Ilium to her hero paid,
And peaceful slept the mighty Hector's shade."
Pope's Homer


Chapter XXI
The Fall of Troy.   Return of the Greeks.   Orestes and Electra

The story of the Iliad ends with the death of Hector, and it is
from the Odyssey and later poems that we learn the fate of the
other heroes.  After the death of Hector, Troy did not
immediately fall, but receiving aid from new allies still
continued its resistance.  One of these allies was Memnon, the
AETHIOPIAN prince, whose story we have already told.  Another was
Penthesilea, queen of the Amazons, who came with a band of female
warriors.  All the authorities attest their valor and the fearful
effect of their war-cry.  Penthesilea slew many of the bravest
warriors, but was at last slain by Achilles.  But when the hero
bent over his fallen foe, and contemplated her beauty, youth and
valor, he bitterly regretted his victory.  Thersites, an insolent
brawler and demagogue, ridiculed his grief, and was in
consequence slain by the hero.

Achilles by chance had seen Polyxena, daughter of King Priam,
perhaps on occasion of the truce which was allowed the Trojans
for the burial of Hector.  He was captivated with her charms, and
to win her in marriage agreed to use his influence with the
Greeks to grant peace to Troy.  While in the temple of Apollo,
negotiating the marriage, Paris discharged at him a poisoned
arrow, which guided by Apollo, wounded Achilles in the heel, the
only vulnerable part about him.  For Thetis, his mother, had
dipped him when an infant in the river Styx, which made every
part of him invulnerable except the heel by which she held him.
(The story of the invulnerability of Achilles is not found in
Homer, and is inconsistent with his account.  For how could
Achilles require the aid of celestial armor if he were
invulnerable?)

The body of Achilles, so treacherously slain, was rescued by Ajax
and Ulysses.  Thetis directed the Greeks to bestow her son's
armor on the hero who, of all survivors, should be judged most
deserving of it.  Ajax and Ulysses were the only claimants; a
select number of the other chiefs were appointed to award the
prize.  It was awarded to Ulysses, thus placing wisdom before
valor; whereupon Ajax slew himself.  On the spot where his blood
sank into the earth a flower sprang up, called the hyacinth,
bearing on its leaves the first two letters of the name of Ajax,
Ai, the Greek for "woe."  Thus Ajax is a claimant with the boy
Hyacinthus for the honor of giving birth to this flower.  There
is a species of Larkspur which represents the hyacinth of the
poets in preserving the memory of this event, the Delphinium
Ajacis   Ajax's Larkspur.

It was now discovered that Troy could not be taken but by the
arrows of Hercules.  They were in possession of Philoctetes, the
friend who had been with Hercules at the last, and lighted his
funeral pyre.  Philoctetes had joined the Grecian expedition
against Troy, but had accidentally wounded his foot with one of
the poisoned arrows, and the smell from his wound proved so
offensive that his companions carried him to the Isle of Lemnos
and left him there.  Diomedes was now sent to induce him to
rejoin the army.  He succeeded.  Philoctetes was cured of his
wound by Machaon, and Paris was the first victim of the fatal
arrows.  In his distress Paris bethought him of one whom in his
prosperity he had forgotten.  This was the nymph OEnone, whom he
had married when a youth, and had abandoned for the fatal beauty
Helen.  OEnone, remembering the wrongs she had suffered, refused
to heal the wound, and Paris went back to Troy and died.  OEnone
quickly repented, and hastened after him with remedies, but came
too late, and in her grief hung herself.

Tennyson has chosen OEnone as the subject of a short poem; but he
has omitted the concluding part of the story, the return of Paris
wounded, her cruelty and subsequent repentance.

"__________Hither came at noon
Mournful OENONE, wandering forlorn
Of Paris, once her playmate on the hills.
Her cheek had lost the rose, and round her neck
Floated her hair, or seemed to float in rest.
She, leaning on a fragment twined with vine,
Sang to the stillness, till the mountain-shade
Sloped downward to her seat from the upper cliff.
.    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
"'O Mother Ida, many-fountain'd Ida,
Dear Mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
I waited underneath the dawning hills,
Aloft the mountain lawn was dewy-dark,
And dewy-dark aloft the mountain pine:
Beautiful Paris, evil-hearted Paris,
Leading a jet-black goat, white-horned, white-hooved,
Come up from reedy Simois, all alone.

"'O Mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
Far off the torrent called me from the cliff:
Far up the solitary morning smote
The streaks of virgin snow.  With downdropt eyes
I sat alone: white-breasted like a star
Fronting the dawn he moved; a leopard-skin
Drooped from his shoulder, but his sunny hair
Clustered about his temples like a God's,
And his cheek brightened as the foambow brightens
When the wind blows the foam, and all my heart
Went forth to embrace him coming, ere he came.

"'Dear Mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
He smiled, and opening out his milk-white palm
Disclosed a fruit of pure Hesperian gold,
That smelt ambrosially, and while I looked
And listened, the full-flowing river of speech
Came down upon my heart.

"My own OENONE,
Beautiful-browed OENONE, my own soul,
Behold this fruit, whose gleaming rind ingraven
'For the most fair,' would seem award it thine
As lovelier than whatever Oread haunt
The knolls of Ida, loveliest in all grace
Of movement, and the charm of married brows."

"'Dear Mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
He prest the blossom of his lips to mine,
And added, "This was cast upon the board,
When all the full-faced presence of the gods
Hanged in the halls of Peleus; whereupon
Rose feud, with question unto whom 'twas due;
But light-foot Iris brought it yester-eve
Delivering, that to me, by common voice
Elected umpire, Her‚ comes to-day,
Pallas and Aphrodite, claiming each
This meed of fairest.  Thou within the cave
Beyond yon whispering tuft of oldest pine,
May'st well behold them unbeheld, unheard
Hear all, and see thy Paris judge of gods."'"

There was in Troy a celebrated statue of Minerva called the
Palladium.  It was said to have fallen from heaven, and the
belief was that the city could not be taken so long as this
statue remained within it.  Ulysses and Diomedes entered the city
in disguise, and succeeded in obtaining the Palladium, which they
carried off to the Grecian camp.

But Troy still held out, and the Greeks began to despair of ever
subduing it by force, and by advice of Ulysses resolved to resort
to stratagem.  They pretended to be making preparations to
abandon the siege, and a portion of the ships were withdrawn, and
lay hid behind a neighboring island.  The Greeks then constructed
an immense WOODEN HORSE, which they gave out was intended as a
propitiatory offering to Minerva, but in fact was filled with
armed men.  The remaining Greeks then betook themselves to their
ships and sailed away, as if for a final departure.  The Trojans,
seeing the encampment broken up and the fleet gone, concluded the
enemy to have abandoned the siege.  The gates were thrown open,
and the whole population issued forth rejoicing at the long-
prohibited liberty of passing freely over the scene of the late
encampment.  The great horse was the chief object of curiosity.
All wondered what it could be for.  Some recommended to take it
into the city as a trophy; others felt afraid of it.

While they hesitate, Laocoon, the priest of Neptune, exclaims,
"What madness, citizens, is this!  Have you not learned enough of
Grecian fraud to be on your guard against it?  For my part I fear
the Greeks even when they offer gifts."  So saying he threw his
lance at the horse's side.  It struck, and a hollow sound
reverberated like a groan.  Then perhaps the people might have
taken his advice and destroyed the fatal horse and all its
contents; but just at that moment a group of people appeared
dragging forward one who seemed a prisoner and a Greek.
Stupefied with terror he was brought before the chiefs, who
reassured him, promising that his life should be spared on
condition of his returning true answers to the questions asked
him.  He informed them that he was a Greek, Sinon by name, and
that in consequence of the malice of Ulysses he had been left
behind by his countrymen at their departure.  With regard to the
wooden horse, he told them that it was a propitiatory offering to
Minerva, and made so huge for the express purpose of preventing
its being carried within the city; for Calchas the prophet had
told them that if the Trojans took possession of it, they would
assuredly triumph over the Greeks.  This language turned the tide
of the people's feelings, and they began to think how they might
best secure the monstrous horse and the favorable auguries
connected with it, when suddenly a prodigy occurred which left no
room to doubt.  There appeared advancing over the sea two immense
serpents.  They came upon the land, and the crowd fled in all
directions.  The serpents advanced directly to the spot where
Laocoon stood with his two sons.  They first attacked the
children, winding round their bodies and breathing their
pestilential breath in their faces.  The father, attempting to
rescue them, is next seized and involved in the serpents' coils.
He struggles to tear them away, but they overpower all his
efforts and strangle him and the children in their poisonous
folds.  This event was regarded as a clear indication of the
displeasure of the gods at Laocoon's irreverent treatment of the
wooden horse, which they no longer hesitated to regard as a
sacred object and prepared to introduce with due solemnity into
the city.  This was done with songs and triumphal acclamations,
and the day closed with festivity.  In the night the armed men
who were enclosed in the body of the horse, being led out by the
traitor Sinon, opened the gates of the city to their friends who
had returned under cover of the night.  The city was set on fire;
the people, overcome with feasting and sleep, put to the sword,
and Troy completely subdued.

One of the most celebrated groups of statuary in existence is
that of Laocoon and his children in the embrace of the serpents.
"There is a cast of it in the Boston Athenaeum; the original is
in the Vatican at Rome.  The following lines are from the Childe
Harold of Byron:

"Now turning to the Vatican go see
Laocoon's torture dignifying pain;
A father's love and mortal's agony
With as immortal's patience blending;   vain
The struggle!  Vain against the coiling strain
And gripe and deepening of the dragon's grasp
The old man's clinch; the long envenomed chain
Rivets the living links; the enormous asp
Enforces pang on pang and stifles gasp on gasp."

The comic poets will also occasionally borrow a classical
allusion.  The following is from Swift's description of a City
Shower:

"Boxed in a chair the beau impatient sits,
While spouts run clattering o'er the roof by fits,
And over and anon with frightful din
The leather sounds; he trembles from within.
So when Troy chairmen bore the wooden steed
Pregnant with Greeks, impatient to be freed,
(Those bully Greeks, who, as the moderns do,
Instead of paying chairmen, run them through;)
Laocoon struck the outside with a spear,
And each imprisoned champion quaked with fear."

King Priam lived to see the downfall of his kingdom, and was
slain at last on the fatal night when the Greeks took the city.
He had armed himself and was about to mingle with the combatants,
but was prevailed on by Hecuba, his aged queen, to take refuge
with herself and his daughters as a suppliant at the altar of
Jupiter.  While there, his youngest son Polites, pursued by
Pyrrhus (Pyrrhus's exclamation, "Not such aid nor such defenders
does the time require," has become proverbial.), the son of
Achilles, rushed in wounded, and expired at the feet of his
father; whereupon Priam, overcome with indignation, hurled his
spear with feeble hand against Pyrrhus, and was forthwith slain
by him.

Queen Hecuba and her daughter Cassandra were carried captives to
Greece.  Cassandra had been loved by Apollo, and he gave her the
gift of prophecy; but afterwards offended with her, he rendered
the gift unavailing by ordaining that her predictions should
never be believed.  Polyxena, another daughter, who had been
loved by Achilles, was demanded by the ghost of this warrior, and
was sacrificed by the Greeks upon his tomb.

>From Schiller's poem "Cassandra":

"And men my prophet wail deride!
The solemn sorrow dies in scorn;
And lonely in the waste, I hide
The tortured heart that would forewarn.
Amid the happy, unregarded,
Mock'd by their fearful joy, I trod;
Oh, dark to me the lot awarded,
Thou evil Pythian God!

"Thine oracle, in vain to be,
Oh, wherefore am I thus consigned,
With eyes that every truth must see,
Lone in the city of the blind?
Cursed with the anguish of a power
To view the fates I may not thrall,
The hovering tempest still must lower,
The horror must befall!

Boots it th veil to lift, and give
To sight the frowning fates beneath?
For error is the life we live,
And, oh, our knowledge is but death!
Take back the clear and awful mirror,
Shut from my eyes the blood-red glare;
Thy truth is but the gift of terror,
When mortal lips declare.

"My blindness give to me once more,
They gay dim senses that rejoice;
The past's delighted songs are o'er
For lips that speak a prophet's voice.
To me the future thou hast granted;
I miss the moment from the chain
The happy present hour enchanted!
Take back thy gift again!"
Sir Edw. L. Bulwer's translation


MENELAUS AND HELEN

Our readers will be anxious to know the fate of Helen, the fair
but guilty occasion of so much slaughter.  On the fall of Troy
Menelaus recovered possession of his wife, who had not ceased to
love him, though she had yielded to the might of Venus and
deserted him for another.  After the death of Paris she aided the
Greeks secretly on several occasions, and in particular when
Ulysses and Diomedes entered the city in disguise to carry off
the Palladium.  She saw and recognized Ulysses, but kept the
secret, and even assisted them in obtaining the image.  Thus she
became reconciled to her husband, and they were among the first
to leave the shores of Troy for their native land.  But having
incurred the displeasure of the gods they were driven by storms
from shore to shore of the Mediterranean, visiting Cyprus,
Phoenicia and Egypt.  In Egypt they were kindly treated and
presented with rich gifts, of which Helen's share was a golden
spindle and a basket on wheels.  The basket was to hold the wool
and spools for the queen's work.

Dyer, in his poem of The Fleece, thus alludes to the incident:

"_________many yet adhere
To the ancient distaff at the bosom fixed.
Casting the whirling spindle as they walk.
.    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
This was of old, in no inglorious days,
The mode of spinning, when the Egyptian prince
A golden distaff gave that beauteous nymph,
Too beauteous Helen; no uncourtly gift."

Milton also alludes to a famous recipe for an invigorating
draught, called Nepenthe, which the Egyptian queen gave to Helen:


"Not that Nepenthes which the wife of Thone
In Egypt gave to Jove-born Helena,
Is of such power to stir up joy as this,
To life so friendly or so cool to thirst."
Comus

Menelaus and Helen at length arrived in safety at Sparta, resumed
their royal dignity, and lived and reigned in splendor; and when
Telemachus, the son of Ulysses, in search of his father, arrived
at Sparta, he found Menelaus and Helen celebrating the marriage
of their daughter Hermione to Neoptolemus, son of Achilles.

In "the Victory Feast," Schiller thus reviews the return of the
Greek heroes.

"The son of Atreus, king of men,
The muster of the hosts surveyed,
How dwindled from the thousands, when
Along Scamander first arrayed!
With sorrow and the cloudy thought,
The great king's stately look grew dim,
Of all the hosts to Ilion brought,
How few to Greece return with him!
Still let the song to gladness call,
For those who yet their home shall greet!
For them the blooming life is sweet;
Return is not for all!

"Nor all who reach their native land
May long the joy of welcome feel;
Beside the household gods may stand
Grim Murder, with awaiting steel
And they who 'scape the foe, may die
Beneath the foul, familiar glaive.
Thus he to whom prophetic eye
Her light the wise Minerva gave;
'Ah!  Bless'd, whose hearth, to memory true
The goddess keeps unstained and pure;
For woman's guile is deep and sure,
And falsehood loves the new!'

"The Spartan eyes his Helen's charms,
By the best blood of Greece recaptured;
Round that fair form his glowing arms
(A second bridal) wreath, enraptured.
Woe waits the work of evil birth,
Revenge to deeds unblessed is given!
For watchful o'er the things of earth,
The eternal council-halls of heaven.
Yes, ill shall never ill repay;
Jove to the impious hands that stain
The altar of man's heart,
Again the doomer's doom shall weigh!"
Sir Edw. L. Bulwer's translation


AGAMEMNON, ORESTES, AND ELECTRA

Agamemnon, the general-in-chief of the Greeks, the brother of
Menelaus, who had been drawn into the quarrel to avenge another's
wrongs, was not so fortunate in the issue as his brother.  During
his absence his wife Clytemnestra had been false to him, and when
his return was expected, she, with her paramour, AEgisthus, laid
a plan for his destruction, and at the banquet given to celebrate
his return, murdered him.

The conspirators intended also to slay his son Orestes, a lad not
yet old enough to be an object of apprehension, but from whom, if
he should be suffered to grow up, there might be danger.
Electra, the sister of Orestes, saved her brother's life by
sending him secretly away to his uncle Strophius, king of Phocis.
In the palace of Strophius, Orestes grew up with the king's son,
Pylades, and formed with him that ardent friendship which has
become proverbial.  Electra frequently reminded her brother hy
messengers of the duty of avenging his father's death, and when
grown up he consulted the oracle of Delphi, which confirmed him
in his design.  He therefore repaired in disguise to Argos,
pretending to he a messenger from Strophius, who had come to
announce the death of Orestes, and brought the ashes of the
deceased in a funeral urn.  After visiting his father's tomb and
sacrificing upon it, according to the rites of the ancients, he
made himself known to his sister Electra, and soon after slew
both AEgisthus and Clytemnestra.

This revolting act, the slaughter of a mother by her son, though
alleviated by the guilt of the victim and the express command of
the gods, did not fail to awaken in the breasts of the ancients
the same abhorrence that it does in ours.  The Eumenides,
avenging deities, seized upon Orestes, and drove him frantic from
land to land.  Pylades accompanied him in his wanderings, and
watched over him.  At length in answer to a second appeal to the
oracle, he was directed to go to Tauris in Scythia, and to bring
thence a statue of Diana which was believed to have fallen from
heaven.  Accordingly Orestes and Pylades went to Tauris, where
the barbarous people were accustomed to sacrifice to the goddess
all strangers who fell into their hands.  The two friends were
seized and carried bound to the temple to be made victims.  But
the priestess of Diana was no other than Iphigenia, the sister of
Orestes, who, our readers will remember, was snatched away by
Diana, at the moment when she was about to be sacrificed.
Ascertaining from the prisoners who they were, Iphigenia
disclosed herself to them, and the three made their escape with
the statue of the goddess, and returned to Mycenae.

But Orestes was not yet relieved from the vengeance of the
Erinnyes.  At length he took refuge with Minerva at Athens.  The
goddess afforded him protection, and appointed the court of
Areopagus to decide his fate.  The Erinnyes brought forward their
accusation, and Orestes made the command of the Delphic oracle
his excuse.  When the court voted and the voices were equally
divided, Orestes was acquitted by the command of Minerva.

Byron, in Childe Harold, Canto IV, alludes to the story of
Orestes:

"O thou who never yet of human wrong
Left the unbalanced scale, great Nemesis!
Thou who didst call the Furies from the abyss,
And round Orestes bade them howl and hiss,
For that unnatural retribution,   just,
Had it but been from hands less near,   in this,
Thy former realm, I call thee from the dust!"

One of the most pathetic scenes in the ancient drama is that in
which Sophocles represents the meeting of Orestes and Electra, on
his return from Phocis.  Orestes, mistaking Electra for one of
the domestics, and desirous of keeping his arrival a secret till
the hour of vengeance should arrive, produces the urn in which
his ashes are supposed to rest.  Electra, believing him to be
really dead, takes the urn, and embracing it, pours forth her
grief in language full of tenderness and despair.

Milton, in one of his sonnets, says:

"The repeated air
Of sad Electra's poet had the power
To save the Athenian walls from ruin bare."

This alludes to the story that when, on one occasion, the city of
Athens was at the mercy of her Spartan foes, and it was proposed
to destroy it, the thought was rejected upon the accidental
quotation, by some one, of a chorus of Euripides.


TROY

After hearing so much about the city of Troy and its heroes, the
reader will perhaps be surprised to learn that the exact site of
that famous city is still a matter of dispute.  There are some
vestiges of tombs on the plain which most nearly answers to the
description given by Homer and the ancient geographers, but no
other evidence of the former existence of a great city.  Byron
thus describes the present appearance of the scene:

"The winds are high, and Helle's tide
Rolls darkly heaving to the main;
And night's descending shadows hide
That field with blood bedewed in vain,
The desert of old Priam's pride,
The tombs, sole relics of his reign,
All   save immortal dreams that could beguile
The blind old man of Scio's rocky isle."
Bride of Abydos.


Chapter XXII

Adventures of Ulysses.   The Lotus-Eaters.   Cyclopes.   Circe.
Sirens.   Scylla and Charybdis.   Calypso

The romantic poem of the Odyssey is now to engage our attention.
It narrates the wanderings of Ulysses (Odysseus in the Greek
language) in his return from Troy to his own kingdom of Ithaca.

>From Troy the vessels first made land at Ismarus, a city of the
Ciconians, where, in a skirmish with the inhabitants, Ulysses
lost six men from each ship.  Sailing thence they were overtaken
by a storm which drove them for nine days along the sea till they
reached the country of the Lotus-eaters.  Here, after watering,
Ulysses sent three of his men to discover who the inhabitants
were.  These men on coming among the Lotus-eaters were kindly
entertained by them, and were given some of their own food, the
lotus-plant to eat.  The effect of this food was such that those
who partook of it lost all thoughts of home and wished to remain
in that country.  It was by main force that Ulysses dragged these
men away, and he was even obliged to tie them under the benches
of his ship.  (Tennyson in the Lotus-eaters has charmingly
expressed the dreamy languid feeling which the lotus-food is said
to have produced:

"How sweet it were, hearing the downward stream
With half-shut eyes ever to seem
Falling asleep in a half-dream!
To dream and dream, like yonder amber light
Which will not leave the myrrh-bush on the height;
To hear each other's whispered speech;
Eating the lotus, day by day,
To watch the crisping ripples on the beach,
And tender curving lines of creamy spray;
To lend our hearts and spirits wholly
To the influence of mild-minded melancholy;
To muse and brood and live again in memory,
With those old faces of our infancy
Heaped over with a mound of grass,
Two handfuls of white dust, shut in an urn of brass.")

They next arrived at the country of the Cyclopes.  The Cyclopes
were giants, who inhabited an island of which they were the only
possessors.  The name means "round eye," and these giants were so
called because they had but one eye, and that placed in the
middle of the forehead.  They dwelt in caves and fed on the wild
productions of the island and on what their flocks yielded, for
they were shepherds.  Ulysses left the main body of his ships at
anchor, and with one vessel went to the Cyclopes' island to
explore for supplies.  He landed with his companions, carrying
with them a jar of wine for a present, and coming to a large cave
they entered it, and finding no one within examined its contents.
They found it stored with the riches of the flock, quantities of
cheese, pails and bowls of milk, lambs and kids in their pens,
all in nice order.  Presently arrived the master of the cave,
Polyphemus, bearing an immense bundle of firewood, which he threw
down before the cavern's mouth.  He then drove into the cave the
sheep and goats to be milked, and, entering, rolled to the cave's
mouth an enormous rock, that twenty oxen could not draw.  Next he
sat down and milked his ewes, preparing a part for cheese, and
setting the rest aside for his customary drink.  Then turning
round his great eye he discerned the strangers, and growled out
to them, demanding who they were, and where from.  Ulysses
replied most humbly, stating that they were Greeks, from the
great expedition that had lately won so much glory in the
conquest of Troy; that they were now on their way home, and
finished by imploring his hospitality in the name of the gods.
Polyphemus deigned no answer, but reaching out his hand, seized
two of the Greeks, whom he hurled against the side of the cave,
and dashed out their brains.  He proceeded to devour them with
great relish, and having made a hearty meal, stretched himself
out on the floor to sleep.  Ulysses was tempted to seize the
opportunity and plunge his sword into him as he slept, but
recollected that it would only expose them all to certain
destruction, as the rock with which the giant had closed up the
door was far beyond their power to remove, and they would
therefore be in hopeless imprisonment.  Next morning the giant
seized two more of the Greeks, and dispatched them in the same
manner as their companions, feasting on their flesh till no
fragment was left.  He then moved away the rock from the door,
drove out his flocks, and went out, carefully replacing the
barrier after him.  When he was gone Ulysses planned how he might
take vengeance for his murdered friends, and effect his escape
with his surviving companions.  He made his men prepare a massive
bar of wood cut by the Cyclops for a staff, which they found in
the cave.  They sharpened the end of it and seasoned it in the
fire, and hid it under the straw on the cavern floor.  Then four
of the boldest were selected, with whom Ulysses joined himself as
a fifth.  The Cyclops came home at evening, rolled away the stone
and drove in his flock as usual.  After milking them and making
his arrangements as before, he seized two more of Ulysses'
companions and dashed their brains out, and made his evening meal
upon them as he had on the others.  After he had supped, Ulysses,
approaching him, handed him a bowl of wine, saying, "Cyclops,
this is wine; taste and drink after thy meal of man's flesh."  He
took and drank it, and was hugely delighted with it, and called
for more.  Ulysses supplied him once and again, which pleased the
giant so much that he promised him as a favor that he should be
the last of the party devoured.  He asked his name, to which
Ulysses replied, "My name is Noman."

After his supper the giant lay down to repose, and was soon sound
asleep.  Then Ulysses with his four select friends thrust the end
of the stake into the fire till it was all one burning coal, then
poising it exactly above the giant's only eye, they buried it
deeply into the socket, twirling it round and round as a
carpenter does his auger.  The howling monster filled the cavern
with his outcry, and Ulysses with his aids nimbly got out of his
way and concealed themselves in the cave.  The Cyclops,
bellowing, called aloud on all the Cyclopes dwelling in the caves
around him, far and near.  They on his cry flocked around the
den, and inquired what grievous hurt had caused him to sound such
an alarm and break their slumbers.  He replied, "O friends, I
die, and Noman gives the blow."  They answered, "If no man hurts
thee it is the stroke of Jove, and thou must bear it."  So
saying, they left him groaning.

Next morning the Cyclops rolled away the stone to let his flock
out to pasture, but planted himself in the door of the cave to
feel of all as they went out, that Ulysses and his men should not
escape with them.  But Ulysses had made his men harness the rams
of the flock three abreast, with osiers which they found on the
floor of the cave.  To the middle ram of the three one of the
Greeks suspended himself, so protected by the exterior rams on
either side.  As they passed, the giant felt of the animals'
backs and sides, but never thought of their bellies; so the men
all passed safe, Ulysses himself being on the last one that
passed.  When they had got a few paces from the cavern, Ulysses
and his friends released themselves from their rams, and drove a
good part of the flock down to the shore to their boat.  They put
them aboard with all haste, then pushed off from the shore, and
when at a safe distance Ulysses shouted, "Cyclops, the gods have
well requited thee for thy atrocious deeds.  Know it is Ulysses
to whom thou owest thy shameful loss of sight."  The Cyclops,
hearing this, seized a rock that projected from the side of the
mountain, and rending it from its bed he lifted it high in the
air, then exerting all his force, hurled it in the direction of
the voice.  Down came the mass, just clearing the vessel's stern.
The ocean, at the plunge of the huge rock, heaved the ship
towards the land, so that it barely escaped being swamped by the
waves.  When they had with the utmost difficulty pulled off
shore, Ulysses was about to hail the giant again, but his friends
besought him not to do so.  He could not forbear, however,
letting the giant know that they had escaped his missile, but
waited till they had reached a safer distance than before,   The
giant answered them with curses, but Ulysses and his friends
plied their oars vigorously, and soon regained their companions.

Ulysses next arrived at the island of AEolus.  To this monarch
Jupiter had intrusted the government of the winds, to send them
forth or retain them at his will.  He treated Ulysses hospitably,
and at his departure gave him, tied up in a leathern bag with a
silver string, such winds as might be hurtful and dangerous,
commanding fair winds to blow the barks towards their country.
Nine days they sped before the wind, and all that time Ulysses
had stood at the helm, without sleep.  At last quite exhausted he
lay down to sleep.  While he slept, the crew conferred together
about the mysterious bag, and concluded it must contain treasures
given by the hospitable King AEolus to their commander.  Tempted
to secure some portion for themselves they loosed the string,
when immediately the winds rushed forth.  The ships were driven
far from their course, and back again to the island they had just
left.  AEolus was so indignant at their folly that he refused to
assist them further, and they were obliged to labor over their
course once more by means of their oars.


THE LAESTRYGONIANS

The next adventure was with the barbarous tribe of
Laestrygonians.  The vessels pushed into the harbor, tempted by
the secure appearance of the cove, completely land-locked;
Ulysses alone moored his vessel without.  As soon as the
Laestrygonians found the ships completely in their power they
attacked them, having huge stones which broke and overturned
them, and with their spears dispatched the seamen as they
struggled in the water.  All the vessels with their crews were
destroyed, except Ulysses' own ship which had remained outside,
and finding no safety but in flight, he exhorted his men to ply
their oars vigorously, and they escaped.

With grief for their slain companions mixed with joy at their own
escape, they pursued their way till they arrived at the Aeaean
isle, where dwelt Circe, the daughter of the sun.  Landing here
Ulysses climbed a hill, and gazing round saw no signs of
habitation except in one spot at the centre of the island, where
he perceived a palace embowered with trees.  He sent forward one-
half of his crew, under the command of Eurylochus, to see what
prospect of hospitality they might find.  As they approached the
palace, they found themselves surrounded by lions, tigers and
wolves, not fierce, but tamed by Circe's art, for she was a
powerful magician.  All these animals had once been men, but had
been changed by Circe's enchantments into the forms of beasts.
The sounds of soft music were heard from within, and a sweet
female voice singing.  Eurylochus called aloud and the goddess
came forth and invited them in.  They all gladly entered except
Eurylochus, who suspected danger.  The goddess conducted her
guests to a seat, and had them served with wine and other
delicacies.  When they had feasted heartily, she touched them one
by one with her wand, and they became immediately changed into
SWINE, in "head, body, voice and bristles," yet with their
intellects as before.  She shut them in her sties, and supplied
them with acorns and such other things as swine love.

Eurylochus hurried back to the ship and told the tale.  Ulysses
thereupon determined to go himself, and try if by any means he
might deliver his companions.  As he strode onward alone, he met
a youth who addressed him familiarly, appearing to be acquainted
with his adventures.  He announced himself as Mercury, and
informed Ulysses of the arts of Circe, and of the danger of
approaching her.  As Ulysses was not to be dissuaded from his
attempts, Mercury provided him with a sprig of the plant Moly, of
wonderful power to resist sorceries, and instructed him how to
act.  Ulysses proceeded, and reaching the palace was courteously
received by Circe, who entertained him as she had done his
companions, and after he had eaten and drank, touched him with
her wand, saying, "Hence seek the sty and wallow with thy
friends."  But he, instead of obeying, drew his sword and rushed
upon her with fury in his countenance.   She fell on her knees
and begged for mercy.  He dictated a solemn oath that she would
release his companions and practise no further against him or
them; and she repeated it, at the same time promising to dismiss
them all in safety after hospitably entertaining them.  She was
as good as her word.  The men were restored to their shapes, the
rest of the crew summoned from the shore, and the whole
magnificently entertained day after day, till Ulysses seemed to
have forgotten his native land, and to have reconciled himself to
an inglorious life of ease and pleasure.

At length his companions recalled him to nobler sentiments, and
he received their admonition gratefully.  Circe aided their
departure, and instructed them how to pas safely by the coast of
the Sirens.  The Sirens were Sea-nymphs who had the power of
charming by their song all who had heard them, so that the
unhappy mariners were irresistibly impelled to cast themselves
into the sea to their destruction.  Circe directed Ulysses to
fill the ears of his seamen with wax, so that they should not
hear the strain; and to cause himself to be bound to the mast,
and his people to be strictly enjoined, whatever he might say or
do, by no means to release him till they should have passed the
Sirens' island.  Ulysses obeyed these directions.  He filled the
ears of his people with wax, and suffered them to bind him with
cords firmly to the mast.  As they approached the Sirens' island,
the sea was calm, and over the waters came the notes of music so
ravishing and attractive, that Ulysses struggled to get loose,
and by cries and signs to his people, begged to be released; but
they, obedient to his previous orders, sprang forward and bound
him still faster.  They held on their course, and the music grew
fainter till it ceased to be heard, when with joy Ulysses gave
his companions the signal to unseal their ears, and they relieved
him from his bonds.

The imagination of a modern poet, Keats, has discovered for us
the thoughts that passed through the brains of the victims of
Circe, after their transformation.  In his Endymion he represents
one of them, a monarch in the guise of an elephant, addressing
the sorceress in human language thus:

"I sue not for my happy crown again;
I sue not for my phalanx on the plain;
I sue not for my lone, my widowed wife;
I sue not for my ruddy drops of life,
My children fair, my lovely girls and boys;
I will forget them; I will pass these joys,
Ask nought so heavenward; so too   too high;
Only I pray, as fairest boon, to die;
To be delivered from this cumbrous flesh,
>From this gross, detestable, filthy mesh,
And merely given to the cold, bleak air.
Have mercy, goddess!  Circe, feel my prayer!"


SCYLLA AND CHARYBDIS

Ulysses had been warned by Circe of the two monsters Scylla and
Charybdis.  We have already met with Scylla in the story of
Glaucus, and remember that she was once a beautiful maiden and
was changed into a snaky monster by Circe.  She dwelt in a cave
high up on the cliff, from whence she was accustomed to thrust
forth her long necks for she had six heads, and in each of her
mouths to seize one of the crew of every vessel passing within
reach.  The other terror, Charybdis, was a gulf, nearly on a
level with the water.  Thrice each day the water rushed into a
frightful chasm, and thrice was disgorged.  Any vessel coming
near the whirlpool when the tide was rushing in must inevitably
by ingulfed; not Neptune himself could save it.

On approaching the haunt of the dread monsters, Ulysses kept
strict watch to discover them.  The roar of the waters as
Charybdis ingulfed them, gave warning at a distance, but Scylla
could nowhere be discerned.  While Ulysses and his men watched
with anxious eyes the dreadful whirlpool, they were not equally
on their guard from the attack of Scylla, and the monster darting
forth her snaky heads, caught six of his men, and bore them away
shrieking to her den.  It was the saddest sight Ulysses had yet
seen; to behold his friends thus sacrificed and hear their cries,
unable to afford them any assistance.

Circe had warned him of another danger.  After passing Scylla and
Charybdis, the next land he would make was Trinakria, an island
whereon were pastured the cattle of Hyperion, the Sun, tended by
his daughters Lampetia and Phaethusa.  These flocks must not be
violated, whatever the wants of the voyagers might be.  If this
injunction were transgressed, destruction was sure to fall on the
offenders.

Ulysses would willingly have passed the island of the Sun without
stopping, but his companions so urgently pleaded for the rest and
refreshment that would be derived from anchoring and passing the
night on shore, that Ulysses yielded.  He bound them, however,
with an oath that they would not touch one of the animals of the
sacred flocks and herds, but content themselves with what
provision they yet had left of the supply which Circe had put on
board.  So long as this supply lasted the people kept their oath,
but contrary winds detained them at the island for a month, and
after consuming all their stock of provisions, they were forced
to rely upon the birds and fishes they could catch.  Famine
pressed them, and at length one day, in the absence of Ulysses,
they slew some of the cattle, vainly attempting to make amends
for the deed by offering from them a portion to the offended
powers.  Ulysses, on his return to the shore, was horror-struck
at perceiving what they had done, and the more so on account of
the portentous signs which followed.  The skins crept on the
ground, and the joints of meat lowed on the spits while roasting.

The wind becoming fair they sailed from the island.  They had not
gone far when the weather changed, and a storm of thunder and
lightning ensued.  A stroke of lightning shattered their mast,
which in its fall killed the pilot.  At last the vessel itself
came to pieces.  The keel and mast floating side by side, Ulysses
formed of them a raft, to which he clung, and, the wind changing,
the waves bore him to Calypso's island.  All the rest of the crew
perished.

The following allusion to the stories we have just been relating
is from Milton's Comus, line 252:

"I have often heard
My mother Circe and the Sirens three,
Amidst the flowery-kirtled Naiades,
Culling their potent herbs and baneful drugs,
Who as they sung would take the prisoned soul
And lap it in Elysium.  Scylla wept,
And chid her barking waves into attention.
And fell Charybdis murmured soft applause."

Scylla and Charybdis have become proverbial, to denote opposite
dangers which beset one's course.


CALYPSO

Calypso was a sea-nymph. One of that numerous class of female
divinities of lower rank than the gods, yet sharing many of their
attributes.  Calypso received Ulysses hospitably, entertained him
magnificently, became enamored of him, and wished to retain him
forever, conferring on him immortality.  But he persisted in his
resolution to return to his country and his wife and son.
Calypso at last received a command from Jove to dismiss him.
Mercury brought the message to her, and found her in her grotto,
which is thus described by Homer:

"A garden vine, luxuriant on all sides,
Mantled the spacious cavern, cluster-hung
Profuse; four fountains of serenest lymph,
Their sinuous course pursuing side by side,
Strayed all around, and every where appeared
Meadows of softest verdure purpled o'er
With violets; it was a scene to fill
A god from heaven with wonder and delight."



Calypso with much reluctance proceeded to obey the commands of
Jupiter. She supplied Ulysses with the means of constructing a
raft, provisioned it well for him, and gave him a favoring gale.
He sped on his course prosperously for many days, till at length,
when in sight of land, a storm arose that broke his mast, and
threatened to rend the raft asunder.  In this crisis he was seen
by a compassionate sea-nymph, who in the form of a cormorant
alighted on the raft, and presented him a girdle, directing him
to bind it beneath his breast, and if he should be compelled to
trust himself to the waves, it would buoy him up and enable him
by swimming to reach the land.

Fenelon, in his romance of Telemachus, has given us the
adventures of the son of Ulysses in search of his father.  Among
other places at which he arrived, following on his father's
footsteps, was Calypso's isle, and, as in the former case, the
goddess tried every art to keep him with her, and offered to
share her immortality with him.  But Minerva, who, in the shape
of Mentor, accompanied him and governed all his movements, made
him repel her allurements, and when no other means of escape
could be found, the two friends leaped from a cliff into the sea,
and swam to a vessel which lay becalmed off shore.  Byron alludes
to this leap of Telemachus and Mentor in the following stanza:

"But not in silence pass Calypso's isles,
The sister tenants of the middle deep;
There for the weary still a haven smiles,
Though the fair goddess long has ceased to weep,
And o'er her cliffs a fruitless watch to keep
For him who dared prefer a mortal bride.
Here too his boy essayed the dreadful leap,
Stern Mentor urged from high to yonder tide;
While thus of both bereft the nymph-queen doubly sighed."


Chapter XXIII
The Odyssey (continued)

THE PHAEACIANS.   FATE OF THE SUITORS

Ulysses clung to the raft while any of its timbers kept together,
and when it no longer yielded him support, binding the girdle
around him, he swam.  Minerva smoothed the billows before him and
sent him a wind that rolled the waves towards the shore.  The
surf beat high on the rocks and seemed to forbid approach; but at
length finding calm water at the mouth of a gentle stream, he
landed, spent with toil, breathless and speechless and almost
dead.  After some time reviving, he kissed the soil, rejoicing,
yet at a loss what course to take.  At a short distance he
perceived a wood, to which he turned his steps.  There finding a
covert sheltered by intermingling branches alike from the sun and
the rain, he collected a pile of leaves and formed a bed, on
which he stretched himself, and heaping the leaves over him, fell
asleep.

The land where he was thrown was Scheria, the country of the
Phaecians.  These people dwelt originally near the Cyclopes; but
being oppressed by that savage race, they migrated to the isle of
Scheria, under the conduct of Nausithous their king.  They were,
the poet tells us, a people akin to the gods, who appeared
manifestly and feasted among them when they offered sacrifices,
and did not conceal themselves from solitary wayfarers when they
met them.  They had abundance of wealth and lived in the
enjoyment of it undisturbed by the alarms of war, for as they
dwelt remote from gain-seeking man, no enemy ever approached
their shores, and they did not even require to make use of bows
and quivers.  Their chief employment was navigation.  Their
ships, which went with the velocity of birds, were endued with
intelligence; they knew every port and needed no pilot.
Alcinous, the son of Nausithous, was now their king, a wise and
just sovereign, beloved by his people.

Now it happened that the very night on which Ulysses was cast
ashore on the Phaeacian island, and while he lay sleeping on his
bed of leaves, Nausicaa, the daughter of the king, had a dream
sent by Minerva, reminding her that her wedding-day was not far
distant, and that it would be but a prudent preparation for that
event to have a general washing of the clothes of the family.
This was no slight affair, for the fountains were at some
distance and the garments must be carried thither.  On awaking,
the princess hastened to her parents to tell them what was on her
mind; not alluding to her wedding-day, but finding other reasons
equally good.  Her father readily assented and ordered the grooms
to furnish forth a wagon for the purpose.  The clothes were put
therein, and the queen mother placed in the wagon, likewise an
abundant supply of food and wine.  The princess took her seat and
plied the lash, her attendant virgins following her on foot.
Arrived at the river side they turned out the mules to graze, and
unloading the carriage, bore the garments down to the water, and
working with cheerfulness and alacrity soon dispatched their
labor.  Then having spread the garments on the shore to dry, and
having themselves bathed, they sat down to enjoy their meal;
after which they rose and amused themselves with a game of ball,
the princess singing to them while they played.  But when they
had refolded the apparel and were about to resume their way to
the town, Minerva caused the ball thrown by the princess to fall
into the water, whereat they all screamed, and Ulysses awaked at
the sound.

Now we must picture to ourselves Ulysses, a shipwrecked mariner,
but just escaped from the waves, and utterly destitute of
clothing, awaking and discovering that only a few bushes were
interposed between him and a group of young maidens, whom, by
their deportment and attire, he discovered to be not mere peasant
girls, but of a higher class.  Sadly needing help, how could he
yet venture, naked as he was, to discover himself and make his
wants known?  It certainly was a case worthy of the interposition
of his patron goddess Minerva, who never failed him at a crisis.
Breaking off a leafy branch from a tree, he held it before him
and stepped out from the thicket.  The virgins, at sight of him,
fled in all directions, Nausicaa alone excepted, for Minerva
aided and endowed her with courage and discernment.  Ulysses,
standing respectfully aloof, told his sad case, and besought the
fair object (whether queen or goddess he professed he knew not)
for food and clothing.  The princess replied courteously,
promising present relief and her father's hospitality when he
should become acquainted with the facts.  She called back her
scattered maidens, chiding their alarm, and reminding them that
the Phaeacians had no enemies to fear.  This man, she told them,
was an unhappy wanderer, whom it was a duty to cherish, for the
poor and stranger are from Jove.  She bade them bring food and
clothing, for some of her brothers' garments were among the
contents of the wagon.  When this was done, and Ulysses, retiring
to a sheltered place, had washed his body free from the sea-foam,
clothed and refreshed himself with food, Pallas dilated his form
and diffused grace over his ample chest and manly brows.

The princess, seeing him, was filled with admiration, and
scrupled not to say to her damsels that she wished the gods would
send her such a husband.  To Ulysses she recommended that he
should repair to the city, following herself and train so far as
the way lay through the fields; but when they should approach the
city she desired that he would no longer be seen in her company,
for she feared the remarks which rude and vulgar people might
make on seeing her return accompanied by such a gallant stranger;
to avoid which she directed him to stop at a grove adjoining the
city, in which were a farm and garden belonging to the king.
After allowing time for the princess and her companions to reach
the city, he was then to pursue his way thither, and would be
easily guided by any he might meet to the royal abode.

Ulysses obeyed the directions, and in due time proceeded to the
city, on approaching which he met a young woman bearing a pitcher
forth for water.  It was Minerva, who had assumed that form.
Ulysses accosted her, and desired to be directed to the palace of
Alcinous the king.  The maiden replied respectfully, offering to
be his guide; for the palace, she informed him, stood near her
father's dwelling.  Under the guidance of the goddess, and by her
power enveloped in a cloud which shielded him from observation,
Ulysses passed among the busy crowd, and with wonder observed
their harbor, their ships, their forum (the resort of heroes),
and their battlements, till they came to the palace, where the
goddess, having first given him some information of the country,
king, and people he was about to meet, left him.  Ulysses, before
entering the courtyard of the palace, stood and surveyed the
scene.  Its splendor astonished him.  Brazen walls stretched from
the entrance to the interior house, of which the doors were gold,
the door-posts silver, the lintels silver ornamented with gold.
On either side were figures of mastiffs wrought in gold and
silver, standing in rows as if to guard the approach.  Along the
walls were seats spread through all their length with mantles of
finest texture, the work of Phaeacian maidens.  On these seats
the princes sat and feasted, while golden statues of graceful
youths held in their hands lighted torches, which shed radiance
over the scene.  Full fifty female menials served in household
offices, some employed to grind the corn, others to wind off the
purple wool or ply the loom.   For the Phaeacian women as far
exceeded all other women in household arts as the mariners of
that country did the rest of mankind in the management of ships.
Without the court a spacious garden lay, in which grew many a
lofty tree, pomegranate, pear, apple, fig, and olive.  Neither
winter's cold nor summer's drought arrested their growth, but
they flourished in constant succession, some budding while others
were maturing.  The vineyard was equally prolific.  In one
quarter you might see the vines, some in blossom, some loaded
with ripe grapes, and in another observe the vintagers treading
the wine-press.  On the garden's borders flowers of every hue
bloomed all the year round, arranged with neatest art.  In the
midst two fountains poured forth their waters, one flowing by
artificial channels over all the garden, the other conducted
through the courtyard of the palace, whence every citizen might
draw his supplies.

Ulysses stood gazing in admiration, unobserved himself, for the
cloud which Minerva spread around him still shielded him.  At
length, having sufficiently observed the scene, he advanced with
rapid step into the hall where the chiefs and senators were
assembled, pouring libation to Mercury, whose worship followed
the evening meal.  Just then Minerva dissolved the cloud and
disclosed him to the assembled chiefs.  Advancing toward the
queen, he knelt at her feet and implored her favor and assistance
to enable him to return to his native country.  Then withdrawing,
he seated himself in the manner of suppliants, at the hearth-
side.

For a time none spoke.  At last an aged statesman, addressing the
king, said, "It is not fit that a stranger who asks our
hospitality should be kept waiting in suppliant guise, none
welcoming him.  Let him therefore be led to a seat among us and
supplied with food and wine."  At these words the king rising
gave his hand to Ulysses and led him to a seat, displacing thence
his own son to make room for the stranger.  Food and wine were
set before him and he ate and refreshed himself.

The king then dismissed his guests, notifying them that the next
day he would call them to council to consider what had best be
done for the stranger.

When the guests had departed and Ulysses was left alone with the
king and queen, the queen asked him who he was and whence he
came, and (recognizing the clothes which he wore as those which
her maidens and herself had made) from whom he received his
garments.  He told them of his residence in Calypso's isle and
his departure thence; of the wreck of his raft, his escape by
swimming, and of the relief afforded by the princess.  The
parents heard approvingly, and the king promised to furnish him a
ship in which he might return to his own land.

The next day the assembled chiefs confirmed the promise of the
king.  A bark was prepared and a crew of stout rowers selected,
and all betook themselves to the palace, where a bounteous repast
was provided.   After the feast the king proposed that the young
men should show their guest their proficiency in manly sports,
and all went forth to the arena for games of running, wrestling,
and other exercises.  After all had done their best, Ulysses
being challenged to show what he could do, at first declined, but
being taunted by one of the youths, seized a quoit of weight far
heavier than any the Phaeacians had thrown, and sent it farther
than the utmost throw of theirs.  All were astonished, and viewed
their guest with greatly increased respect.

After the games they returned to the hall, and the herald led in
Demodocus, the blind bard,

"Dear to the Muse,
Who yet appointed him both good and ill,
Took from him sight, but gave him strains divine."

He took for his theme the wooden horse, by means of which the
Greeks found entrance into Troy.  Apollo inspired him, and he
sang so feelingly of the terrors and the exploits of that
eventful time that all were delighted, but Ulysses was moved to
tears.  Observing which, Alcinous, when the song was done,
demanded of him why at the mention of troy his sorrows awaked.
Had he lost there a father or brother, or any dear friend?
Ulysses in reply announced himself by his true name, and at their
request, recounted the adventures which had befallen him since
his departure from Troy.  This narrative raised the sympathy and
admiration of the Phaeacians for their guest to the highest
pitch.  The king proposed that each chief should present him with
a gift, himself setting the example.  They obeyed, and vied with
one another in loading the illustrious stranger with costly
gifts.

The next day Ulysses set sail in the Phaeacian vessel, and in a
short time arrived safe at Ithaca, his own island.  When the
vessel touched the strand he was asleep.  The mariners, without
waking him, carried him on shore, and landed with him the chest
containing his presents, and then sailed away.

But Neptune was displeased at the conduct of the Phaeacians in
thus rescuing Ulysses from his hands.  In revenge, on the return
of the vessel to port, he transformed it into a rock, right
opposite the mouth of the harbor.

Homer's description of the ships of the Phaeacians has been
thought to look like an anticipation of the wonders of modern
steam navigation.  Alcinous says to Ulysses,

"Say from what city, from what regions tossed,
And what inhabitants those regions boast?
So shalt thou quickly reach the realm assigned,
In wondrous ships, self-moved, instinct with mind;
No helm secures their course, no pilot guides;
Like man intelligent they plough the tides,
Conscious of every coast and every bay
That lies beneath the sun's all-seeing ray."
Odyssey, Book VIII

Lord Carlisle, in his Diary in the Turkish and Greek Waters, thus
speaks of Corfu, which he considers to be the ancient Phaeacian
island:

"The sites explain the Odyssey.  The temple of the sea-god could
not have been more fitly placed, upon a grassy platform of the
most elastic turf, on the brow of a crag commanding harbor, and
channel, and ocean.  Just at the entrance of the inner harbor
there is a picturesque rock with a small convent perched atop it,
which by one legend is the transformed pinnace of Ulysses.

"Almost the only river in the island is just at the proper
distance from the probable site of the city and palace of the
king, to justify the princess Nausicaa having had resort to her
chariot and to luncheon when she went with the maidens of the
court to wash their garments."


FATE OF THE SUITORS

It was now twenty years that Ulysses had been away from Ithaca,
and when he awoke he did not recognize his native land.  But
Minerva, appearing to him in the form of a young shepherd,
informed him where he was, and told him the state of things at
his palace.  More than a hundred nobles of Ithaca and of the
neighboring islands had been for years suing for the hand of
Penelope, his wife, imagining him dead, and lording it over his
palace and people, as if they were owners of both.  That he might
be able to take vengeance upon them, it was important that he
should not be recognized.  Minerva accordingly metamorphosed him
into an unsightly beggar, and as such he was kindly received by
Eumaeus, the swine-herd, a faithful servant of his house.

Telemachus, his son, was absent in quest of his father.  He had
gone to the courts of the other kings, who had returned from the
Trojan expedition.  While on the search, he received counsel from
Minerva to return home.  Arriving at Ithaca, he sought Eumaeus to
learn something of the state of affairs at the palace before
presenting himself among the suitors.  Finding a stranger with
Eumaeus, he treated him courteously, though in the garb of a
beggar, and promised him assistance.  Eumaeus was sent to the
palace to inform Penelope privately of her son's arrival, for
caution was necessary with regard to the suitors, who, as
Telemachus had learned, were plotting to intercept and kill him.
When Eumaeus was gone, Minerva presented herself to Ulysses, and
directed him to make himself known to his son.  At the same time
she touched him, removed at once from him the appearance of age
and penury, and gave him the aspect of vigorous manhood that
belonged to him.  Telemachus viewed him with astonishment, and at
first thought he must be more than mortal.  But Ulysses announced
himself as his father, and accounted for the change of appearance
by explaining that it was Minerva's doing.

"Then threw Telemachus
His arms around his father's neck and wept,
Desire intense of lamentation seized
On both; soft murmurs uttering, each indulged
His grief."

The father and son took counsel together how they should get the
better of the suitors and punish them for their outrages.  It was
arranged that Telemachus should proceed to the palace and mingle
with the suitors as formerly; that Ulysses should go also, as a
beggar, a character which in the rude old times had different
privileges from those we concede to it now.  As traveller and
story-teller, the beggar was admitted in the halls of chieftains,
and often treated like a guest; though sometimes, also, no doubt,
with contumely.  Ulysses charged his son not to betray, by any
display of unusual interest in him, that he knew him to be other
than he seemed, and even if he saw him insulted, or beaten, not
to interpose otherwise than he might do for any stranger.

At the palace they found the usual scene of feasting and riot
going on.  The suitors pretended to receive Telemachus with joy
at his return, though secretly mortified at the failure of their
plots to take his life.  The old beggar was permitted to enter,
and provided with a portion from the table.  A touching incident
occurred as Ulysses entered the court-yard of the palace.  An old
dog lay in the yard almost dead with age, and seeing a stranger
enter, raised his head, with ears erect.  It was Argus, Ulysses'
own dog, that he had in other days often led to the chase.

"Soon he perceived
Long-lost Ulysses nigh, down fell his ears
Clapped close, and with his tail glad signs he gave
Of gratulation, impotent to rise,
And to approach his master as of old.
Ulysses, noting him, wiped off a tear
Unmarked.
. . .  Then his destiny released
Old Argus, soon as he had lived to see
Ulysses in the twentieth year restored."

As Ulysses sat eating his portion in the hall, the suitors soon
began to exhibit their insolence to him.  When he mildly
remonstrated, one of them raised a stool and with it gave him a
blow.  Telemachus had hard work to restrain his indignation at
seeing his father so treated in his own hall, but remembering his
father's injunctions, said no more than what became him as master
of the house and protector of his guests.

Penelope had protracted her decision in favor of any one of her
suitors so long, that there seemed to be no further pretence for
delay.  The continued absence of her husband seemed to prove that
his return was no longer to be expected.  Meanwhile her son had
grown up, and was able to manage his own affairs.  She therefore
consented to submit the question of her choice to a trial of
skill among the suitors.  The test selected was shooting with the
bow.  Twelve rings were arranged in a line, and he whose arrow
was sent through the whole twelve, was to have the queen for his
prize.  A bow that one of his brother heroes had given to Ulysses
in former times, was brought from the armory, and with its quiver
full of arrows was laid in the hall.   Telemachus had taken care
that all other weapons should be removed, under pretence that in
the heat of competition, there was danger, in some rash moment,
of putting them to an improper use.

All things being prepared for the trial, the first thing to be
done was to bend the bow in order to attach the string.
Telemachus endeavored to do it, but found all his efforts
fruitless; and modestly confessing that he had attempted a task
beyond his strength, he yielded the bow to another.  HE tried it
with no better success, and, amidst the laughter and jeers of his
companions, gave it up.  Another tried it and another; they
rubbed the bow with tallow, but all to no purpose; it would not
bend.  Then spoke Ulysses, humbly suggesting that he should be
permitted to try; for, said he, "beggar as I am, I was once a
soldier, and there is still some strength in these old limbs of
mine."  The suitors hooted with derision, and commanded to turn
him out of the hall for his insolence.  But Telemachus spoke up
for him, and merely to gratify the old man, bade him try.
Ulysses took the bow, and handled it with the hand of a master.
With ease he adjusted the cord to its notch, then fitting an
arrow to the bow he drew the string and sped the arrow unerring
through the rings.

Without allowing them time to express their astonishment, he
said, "Now for another mark!" and aimed direct at the most
insolent one of the suitors. The arrow pierced through his throat
and he fell dead.  Telemachus, Eumaeus, and another faithful
follower, well armed, now sprang to the side of Ulysses.  The
suitors, in amazement, looked round for arms but found none,
neither was there any way of escape, for Eumaeus had secured the
door.  Ulysses left them not long in uncertainty; he announced
himself as the long-lost chief, whose house they had invaded,
whose substance they had squandered, whose wife and son they had
persecuted for ten long years; and told them he meant to have
ample vengeance.  All the suitors were slain, except Phemius the
bard and Medon the herald, and Ulysses was left master of his own
palace and possessor of his kingdom and his wife.

Among Schiller's works is the following epigram on Ulysses:

"To gain his home all oceans he explored;
Here Scylla frowned, and there Charybdis roared;
Horror on sea, and horror on the land,
In hell's dark boat he sought the spectre land,
Till borne   a slumberer   to his native spot,
He woke, and sorrowing, knew his country not."
Sir Edward Bulwer"s translation

Tennyson's poem of Ulysses represents the old hero, after his
dangers past and nothing left but to stay at home and be happy,
growing tired of inaction and resolving to set forth again in
quest of new adventures.

"Come my friends,
'Tis not too late to seek a newer world.
Push off, and sitting well in order smite
The sounding furrows; for my purpose holds
To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths
Of all the western stars, until I die.
It may be that the gulfs will wash us down;
It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles,
And see the great Achilles whom we knew,
Tho'much is taken, much abides; and tho'
We are not now that strength which in old days
Moved earth and heaven; that which we are, we are;
One equal temper of heroic hearts,
Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will
To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield."


Chapter XXIV
Adventures of AEneas   The Harpies   Dido   Palinurus

We have followed one of the Grecian heroes, Ulysses, in his
wanderings, on his return home from Troy, and now we propose to
share the fortunes of the remnant of the conquered people, under
their chief AEneas, in their search for a new home, after the
ruin of their native city.  On that fatal night when the wooden
horse disgorged its contents of armed men, and the capture and
conflagration of the city were the result, Aeneas made his escape
from the scene of destruction with his father, and his wife, and
young son.  The father, Anchises, was woo old to walk with the
speed required, and AEneas took him upon his shoulders.  Thus
burdened, leading his son and followed by his wife, he made the
best of his way out of the burning city; but in the confusion,
his wife was swept away and lost.

On arriving at the place of rendezvous, numerous fugitives, of
both sexes, were found, who put themselves under the guidance of
Aeneas.  Some months were spent in preparation and at length they
embarked.  They first landed on the neighboring shores of Thrace,
and were preparing to build a city, but AEneas was deterred by a
prodigy.  Preparing to offer sacrifice, he tore some twigs from
one of the bushes.  To his dismay the wounded part dropped blood.
When he repeated the act, a voice from the ground cried out to
him, "Spare me, AEneas; I am your kinsman, Polydore, here
murdered with many arrows, from which a bush has grown, nourished
with my blood."  These words recalled to the recollection of
AEneas that Polydore was a young prince of Troy, whom his father
had sent with ample treasures to the neighboring land of Thrace,
to be there brought up, at a distance from the horrors of war.
The king to whom he was sent had murdered him, and seized his
treasures.  AEneas and his companions hastened away, considering
the land to be accursed by the stain of such a crime.

They next landed on the island of Delos, which was once a
floating island, till Jupiter fastened it by adamantine chains to
the bottom of the sea.  Apollo and Diana were born there, and the
island was sacred to Apollo.  Here AEneas consulted the oracle of
Apollo, and received an answer, as ambiguous as usual   "Seek
your ancient mother; there the race of AEneas shall dwell, and
reduce all other nations to their sway."  The Trojans heard with
joy, and immediately began to ask one another, "Where is the spot
intended by the oracle?"  Anchises remembered that there was a
tradition that their forefathers came from Crete, and thither
they resolved to steer.  They arrived at Crete, and began to
build their city, but sickness broke out among them, and the
fields that they had planted failed to yield a crop.  In this
gloomy aspect of affairs, AEneas was warned in a dream to leave
the country, and seek a western land, called Hesperia, whence
Dardanus, the true founder of the Trojan race, had originally
migrated.  To Hesperia, now called Italy, therefore, they
directed their future course, and not till after many adventures
and the lapse of time sufficient to carry a modern navigator
several times round the world, did they arrive there.

Their first landing was at the island of the Harpies:

"__________The daughters of the earth and sea,
The dreadful snatchers, who like women were
Down to the breast, with scanty coarse black hair
About their heads, and dim eyes ringed with red,
And bestial mouths set round with lips of lead,
But from their gnarled necks there began to spring
Half hair, half feathers, and a sweeping wing
Grew out instead of arm on either side,
And thick plumes underneath the breast did hide
The place where joined the fearful natures twain.
Gray-feathered were they else, with many a stain
Of blood thereon, and on birds' claws they went.
Morris: Life and Death of Jason

The Harpies had been sent by the gods to torment a certain
Phineus, whom Jupiter had deprived of his sight in punishment of
his cruelty; and whenever a meal was placed before him, the
Harpies darted down from the air and carried it off.  They were
driven away from Phineus by the heroes of the Argonautic
expedition, and took refuge in the island where AEneas now found
them.

When they entered the port the Trojans saw herds of cattle
roaming over the plain.  They slew as many as they wished, and
prepared for a feast.  But no sooner had they seated themselves
at the table, than a horrible clamor was heard in the air, and a
flock of odious Harpies came rushing down upon them, seizing in
their talons the meat from the dishes, and flying away with it.
AEneas and his companions drew their swords and dealt vigorous
blows among the monsters, but to no purpose, for they were so
nimble it was almost impossible to hit them, and their feathers
were like armor impenetrable to steel.  One of them, perched on a
neighboring cliff, screamed out, "Is it thus, Trojans, you treat
us innocent birds, first slaughter our cattle, and then make war
on ourselves?"  She then predicted dire sufferings to them in
their future course, and having vented her wrath flew away.  The
Trojans made haste to leave the country, and next found
themselves coasting along the shore of Epirus.  Here they landed,
and to their astonishment learned that certain Trojan exiles, who
had been carried there as prisoners, had become rulers of the
country.  Andromache, the widow of Hector, became the wife of one
of the victorious Grecian chiefs, to whom she bore a son.  Her
husband dying, she was left regent of the country, as guardian of
her son, and had married a fellow-captive, Helenus, of the royal
race of Troy.  Helenus and Andromache treated the exiles with the
utmost hospitality, and dismissed them loaded with gifts.

>From hence AEneas coasted along the shore of Sicily, and passed
the country of Cyclopes.  Here they were hailed from the shore by
a miserable object, whom by his garments, tattered as they were,
they perceived to be a Greek.  He told them he was one of
Ulysses' companions, left behind by that chief in his hurried
departure.  He related the story of Ulysses' adventure with
Polyphemus, and besought them to take him off with them, as he
had no means of sustaining his existence where he was, but wild
berries and roots, and lived in constant fear of the Cyclopes.
While he spoke Polyphemus made his appearance; a terrible
monster, shapeless, vast, whose only eye had been put out.  He
walked with cautious steps, feeling his way with a staff, down to
the sea-side, to wash his eye-socket in the waves.  When he
reached the water, he waded out towards them, and his immense
height enabled him to advance far into the sea, so that the
Trojans, in terror, took to their oars to get out of his way.
Hearing the oars, Polyphemus shouted after them, so that the
shores resounded, and at the noise the other Cyclopes came forth
from their caves and woods, and lined the shore, like a row of
lofty pine trees.  The Trojans plied their oars, and soon left
them out of sight.

AEneas had been cautioned by Helenus to avoid the strait guarded
by the monsters Scylla and Charybdis.  There Ulysses, the reader
will remember, had lost six of his men, seized by Scylla, while
the navigators were wholly intent upon avoiding Charybdis.
AEneas, following the advice of Helenus, shunned the dangerous
pass and coasted along the island of Sicily.

Juno, seeing the Trojans speeding their way prosperously towards
their destined shore, felt her old grudge against them revive,
for she could not forget the slight that Paris had put upon her,
in awarding the prize of beauty to another.  In heavenly minds
can such resentments dwell!  Accordingly she hastened to AEolus,
the ruler of the winds,   the same who supplied Ulysses with
favoring gales, giving him the contrary ones tied up in a bag.
AEolus obeyed the goddess and sent forth his sons, Boreas, Typhon
and the other winds, to toss the ocean.  A terrible storm ensued,
and the Trojan ships were driven out of their course towards the
coast of Africa.  They were in imminent danger of being wrecked,
and were separated, so that AEneas thought that all were lost
except his own.

At this crisis, Neptune, hearing the storm raging, and knowing
that he had given no orders for one, raised his head above the
waves, and saw the fleet of AEneas driving before the gale.
Knowing the hostility of Juno, he was at no loss to account for
it, but his anger was not the less at this interference in his
province.  He called the winds, and dismissed them with a severe
reprimand.  He then soothed the waves, and brushed away the
clouds from before the face of the sun.  Some of the ships which
had got on the rocks he pried off with his own trident, while
Triton and a sea-nymph, putting their shoulders under others, set
them afloat again.  The Trojans, when the sea became calm, sought
the nearest shore, which was the coast of Carthage, where AEneas
was so happy as to find that one by one the ships all arrived
safe, though badly shaken.

Waller, in his Panegyric to the Lord Protector (Cromwell),
alludes to this stilling of the storm by Neptune:

"Above the waves, as Neptune showed his face,
To chide the winds and save the Trojan race,
So has your Highness, raised above the rest,
Storms of ambition tossing us repressed.."

DIDO

Carthage, where the exiles had now arrived, was a spot on the
coast of Africa opposite Sicily, where at that time a Tyrian
colony under Dido their queen, were laying the foundations of a
state destined in later ages to be the rival of Rome itself.
Dido was the daughter of Belus, king of Tyre, and sister of
Pygmalion who succeeded his father on the throne.  Her husband
was Sichaeus, a man of immense wealth, but Pygmalion, who coveted
his treasures, caused him to be put to death.  Dido, with a
numerous body of followers, both men and women, succeeded in
effecting their escape from Tyre in several vessels, carrying
with them the treasures of Sichaeus.  On arriving at the spot
which they selected as the seat of their future home, they asked
of the natives only so much land as they could enclose with a
bull's hide.  When this was readily granted, she caused the hide
to be cut into strips, and with them enclosed a spot on which she
built a citadel, and called it Byrsa (a hide).  Around this fort
the city of Carthage rose, and soon became a powerful and
flourishing place.

Such was the state of affairs when AEneas with his Trojans
arrived there.  Dido received the illustrious exiles with
friendliness and hospitality.  "Not unacquainted with distress,"
she said, "I have learned to succor the unfortunate."  The
queen's hospitality displayed itself in festivities at which
games of strength and skill were exhibited.  The strangers
contended for the palm with her own subjects on equal terms, the
queen declaring that whether the victor were "Trojan or Tyrian
should make no difference to her."  At the feast which followed
the games, AEneas gave at her request a recital of the closing
events of the Trojan history and his own adventures after the
fall of the city.  Dido was charmed with his discourse and filled
with admiration of his exploits.  She conceived an ardent passion
for him, and he for his part seemed well content to accept the
fortunate chance which appeared to offer him at once a happy
termination of his wanderings, a home, a kingdom, and a bride.
Months rolled away in the enjoyment of pleasant intercourse, and
it seemed as if Italy and the empire destined to be founded on
its shores were alike forgotten.  Seeing which, Jupiter
dispatched Mercury with a message to AEneas recalling him to a
sense of his high destiny, and commanding him to resume his
voyage.

AEneas, under this divine command, parted from Dido, though she
tried every allurement and persuasion to detain him.  The blow to
her affection and her pride was too much for her to endure, and
when she found that he was gone, she mounted a funeral-pile which
she had caused to be prepared, and, having stabbed herself, was
consumed with the pile.  The flames rising over the city were
seen by the departing Trojans, and, though the cause was unknown,
gave to AEneas some intimation of the fatal event.

We find in "Elegant Extracts" the following epigram:

>From the Latin

"Unhappy, Dido, was thy fate
In first and second married state!
One husband caused thy flight by dying,
Thy death the other caused by flying."

Dr. Johnson was once challenged to make an epigram on the
syllables di,do,dum.  He immediately replied in these lines:

 "When Dido found Aeneas would not come,
She wept in silence, and was Dido dumb.

PALINURUS

After touching at the island of Sicily, where Acestes, a prince
of Trojan lineage, bore sway, who gave them a hospitable
reception, the Trojans re-embarked, and held on their course for
Italy.  Venus now interceded with Neptune to allow her son at
last to attain the wished-for goal, and find an end of his perils
on the deep.  Neptune consented, stipulating only for one life as
a ransom for the rest.  The victim was Palinurus, the pilot.  As
he sat watching the stars, with his hand on the helm, Somnus,
sent by Neptune, approached in the guise of Phorbas and said,
"Palinurus, the breeze is fair, the water smooth, and the ship
sails steadily on her course.  Lie down a while and take needful
rest.  I will stand at the helm in your place."  Palinurus
replied, "Tell me not of smooth seas or favoring winds,   me who
have seen so much of their treachery.  Shall I trust AEneas to
the chances of the weather and winds?"  And he continued to grasp
the helm and to keep his eyes fixed on the stars.  But Somnus
waved over him a branch moistened with Lethaean dew, and his eyes
closed in spite of all his efforts.  Then Somnus pushed him
overboard and he fell; but keeping his hold upon the helm it came
away with him.  Neptune was mindful of his promise, and kept the
ship on her track without helm or pilot, till Aeneas discovered
his loss, and, sorrowing deeply for his faithful steersman, took
charge of the ship himself.

There is a beautiful allusion to the story of Palinurus in
Scott's Marmion, Introduction to Canto I., where the poet,
speaking of the recent death of William Pitt, says:

"Oh, think how, to his latest day,
When death just hovering claimed his prey,
With Palinure's unaltered mood,
Firm at his dangerous post he stood;
Each call for needful rest repelled,
With dying hand the rudder held,
Till in his fall, with fateful sway,
The steerage of the realm gave way."

The ships at last reached the shores of Italy, and joyfully did
the adventurers leap to land.  While his people were employed in
making their encampment AEneas sought the abode of the Sibyl.  It
was a cave connected with a temple and grove, sacred to Apollo
and Diana.  While Aeneas contemplated the scene, the Sibyl
accosted him.  She seemed to know his errand, and under the
influence of the deity of the place burst forth in a prophetic
strain, giving dark intimations of labors and perils through
which he was destined to make his way to final success.  She
closed with the encouraging words which have become proverbial:
"Yield not to disasters, but press onward the more bravely."
AEneas replied that he had prepared himself for whatever might
await him.  He had but one request to make.  Having been directed
in a dream to seek the abode of the dead in order to confer with
his father Anchises to receive from him a revelation of his
future fortunes and those of his race, he asked her assistance to
enable him to accomplish the task.  The Sibyl replied, "The
descent to Avernus is easy; the gate of Pluto stands open night
and day; but to retrace one's steps and return to the upper air,
that is the toil, that the difficulty.  She instructed him to
seek in the forest a tree on which grew a golden branch.  This
branch was to be plucked off, to be borne as a gift to
Proserpine, and if fate was propitious, it would yield to the
hand and quit its parent trunk, but otherwise no force could rend
it away.  If torn away, another would succeed.

AEneas followed the directions of the Sibyl.  His mother Venus
sent two of her doves to fly before him and show him the way, and
by their assistance he found the tree, plucked the branch, and
hastened back with it to the Sibyl.


Chapter XXV
The Infernal Regions   The Sibyl

At the commencement of our series we have given the pagan account
of the creation of the world, so as we approach its conclusion,
we present a view of the regions of the dead, depicted by one of
their most enlightened poets, who drew his doctrines from their
most esteemed philosophers.  The region where Virgil places the
entrance into this abode, is perhaps the most strikingly adapted
to excite ideas of the terrific and preternatural of any on the
face of the earth.  It is the volcanic region near Vesuvius,
where the whole country is cleft with chasms from which
sulphurous flames arise, while the ground is shaken with pent-up
vapors, and mysterious sounds issue from the bowels of the earth.
The lake Avernus is supposed to fill the crater of an extinct
volcano.  It is circular, half a mile wide, and very deep,
surrounded by high banks, which in Virgil's time were covered
with a gloomy forest.  Mephitic vapors rise from its waters, so
that no life is found on its banks, and no birds fly over it.
Here, according to the poet, was the cave which afforded access
to the infernal regions, and here AEneas offered sacrifices to
the infernal deities, Proserpine, Hecate, and the Furies.  Then a
roaring was heard in the earth, the woods on the hill-tops were
shaken, and the howling of dogs announced the approach of the
deities.  "Now," said the Sibyl, "summon up your courage, for you
will need it."  She descended into the cave, and AEneas followed.
Before the threshold of Hades they passed through a group of
beings who are Griefs and avenging Cares, pale Diseases and
melancholy Age, Fear and Hunger that tempt to crime, Toil,
Poverty, and Death, forms horrible to view.  The Furies spread
their couches there, and Discord, whose hair was of vipers tied
up with a bloody fillet.  Here also were the monsters, Briareus
with his hundred arms, Hydras hissing, and Chimaeras breathing
fire.  AEneas shuddered at the sight, drew his sword and would
have struck, had not the Sibyl restrained him.  They then came to
the black river Cocytus, where they found the ferryman, Charon,
old and squalid, but strong and vigorous, who was receiving
passengers of all kinds into his boat, high-souled heroes, boys
and unmarried girls as numerous as the leaves that fall at
autumn, or the flocks that fly southward at the approach of
winter.  They stood pressing for a passage, and longing to touch
the opposite shore.  But the stern ferryman took in only such as
he chose, driving the rest back.  AEneas, wondering at the sight,
asked the Sibyl, "Why this discrimination?: She answered, "Those
who are taken on board the bark are the souls of those who have
received due burial rites; the host of others who have remained
unburied, are not permitted to pass the flood, but wander a
hundred years, and flit to and fro about the shore, till at last
they are taken over."  AEneas grieved at recollecting some of his
own companions who had perished in the storm.  At that moment he
beheld Palinurus, his pilot, who fell overboard and was drowned.
He addressed him and asked him the cause of his misfortune.
Palinurus replied that the rudder was carried away, and he,
clinging to it, was swept away with it.  He besought Aeneas most
urgently to extend to him his hand and take him in company to the
opposite shore.  But the Sibyl rebuked him for the wish thus to
transgress the laws of Pluto, but consoled him by informing him
that the people of the shore where his body had been wafted by
the waves, should be stirred up by the prodigies to give it the
burial, and that the promontory should bear the name of Cape
Palinurus, which it does to this day.  Leaving Palinurus consoled
by these words, they approached the boat.  Charon, fixing his
eyes sternly upon the advancing warrior, demanded by what right
he, living and armed, approached the shore.  To which the Sibyl
replied that they would commit no violence, that AEneas's only
object was to see his father, and finally exhibited the golden
branch, at sight of which Charon's wrath relaxed, and he made
haste to turn his back to the shore, and receive them on board.
The boat, adapted only to the light freight of bodiless spirits,
groaned under the weight of the hero.  They were soon conveyed to
the opposite shore.  There they were encountered by the three-
headed dog Cerberus, with his necks bristling with snakes.  He
barked with all his three throats till the Sibyl threw him a
medicated cake, which he eagerly devoured, and then stretched
himself out in his den and fell asleep.  AEneas and the Sibyl
sprang to land.  The first sound that struck their ears was the
wailing of young children, who had died on the threshold of life,
and near to these were they who had perished under false charges.
Minos presides over them as judge, and examines the deeds of
each.  The next class was of those who had died by their own
hand, hating life and seeking refuge in death.  Oh, how willingly
would they now endure poverty, labor, and any other infliction,
if they might but return to life!  Next were situated the regions
of sadness, divided off into retired paths, leading through
groves of myrtle.  Here roamed those who had fallen victims to
unrequited love, not freed from pain even by death itself.  Among
these, AEneas thought he descried the form of Dido, with a wound
still recent.  In the dim light he was for a moment uncertain,
but approaching perceived it was indeed herself.  Tears fell from
his eyes, and he addressed her in the  accents of love.  "Unhappy
Dido!  Was then the rumor true that you had perished?  And was I,
alas! the cause!  I call the gods to witness that my departure
from you was reluctant, and in obedience to the commands of Jove;
nor could I believe that my absence would have cost you so dear.
Stop, I beseech you, and refuse me not a last farewell."  She
stood for a moment with averted countenance, and eyes fixed on
the ground, and then silently passed on, as insensible to his
pleadings as a rock.   AEneas followed for some distance; then,
with a heavy heart, rejoined his companion and resumed his route.

They next entered the fields where roam the heroes who have
fallen in battle.  Here they saw many shades of Grecian and
Trojan warriors.  The Trojans thronged around him, and could not
be satisfied with the sight.  They asked the cause of his coming,
and plied him with innumerable questions.  But the Greeks, at the
sight of his armor glittering through the murky atmosphere,
recognized the hero, and filled with terror turned their backs
and fled, as they used to flee on the plains of Troy.

AEneas would have lingered long with his Trojan friends but the
Sibyl hurried him away.  They next came to a place where the road
divided, the one leading to Elysium, the other to the regions of
the condemned.  AEneas beheld on one side the walls of a mighty
city, around which Phlegethon rolled its fiery waters.  Before
him was the gate of adamant that neither gods nor men can break
through.   An iron tower stood by the gate, on which Tisiphone,
the avenging Fury, kept guard.  From the city were heard groans,
and the sound of the scourge, the creaking of iron, and the
clanking of chains.  AEneas, horror-struck, inquired of his guide
what crimes were those whose punishments produced the sounds he
hear?   The Sibyl answered, "Here is the judgment-hall of
Rhadamanthus, who brings to light crimes done in life, which the
perpetrator vainly thought impenetrably hid.  Tisiphone applies
her whip of scorpions, and delivers the offender over to her
sister Furies.  At this moment with horrid clang the brazen gates
unfolded, and AEneas saw within, a Hydra with fifty heads,
guarding the entrance.  The Sibyl told him that the Gulf of
Tartarus descended deep, so that its recesses were as far beneath
their feet as heaven was high above their heads.  In the bottom
of this pit, the Titan race, who warred against the gods, lie
prostrate; Salmoneus, also, who presumed to vie with Jupiter, and
built a bridge of brass over which he drove his chariot that the
sound might resemble thunder, launching flaming brands at his
people in imitation of lightning, till Jupiter struck him with a
real thunderbolt, and taught him the difference between mortal
weapons and divine.  Here, also, is Tityus, the giant, whose form
is so immense that as he lies, he stretches over nine acres,
while a vulture preys upon his liver, which as fast as it is
devoured grows again, so that his punishment will have no end.

AEneas saw groups seated at tables loaded with dainties, while
near by stood a Fury who snatched away the viands from their
lips, as fast as they prepared to taste them.  Others beheld
suspended over their heads huge rocks, threatening to fall,
keeping them in a state of constant alarm.  These were they who
had hated their brothers, or struck their parents, or defrauded
the friends who trusted them, or who having grown rich, kept
their money to themselves, and gave no share to others; the last
being the most numerous class.  Here also were those who had
violated the marriage vow, or fought in a bad cause, or failed in
fidelity to their employers.  Here was one who had sold his
country for gold, another who perverted the laws, making them say
one thing today and another tomorrow.

Ixion was there fastened to the circumference of a wheel
ceaselessly revolving; and Sisyphus, whose task was to roll a
huge stone up to a hill-top, but when the steep was well-nigh
gained, the rock, repulsed by some sudden force, rushed again
headlong down to the plain.  Again he toiled at it, while the
sweat bathed all his weary limbs, but all to no effect.  There
was Tantalus, who stood in a pool, his chin level with the water,
yet he was parched with thirst, and found nothing to assuage it;
for when he bowed his hoary head, eager to quaff, the water fled
away, leaving the ground at his feet all dry.  Tall trees laden
with fruit stooped their heads to him, pears, pomegranates,
apples and luscious figs; but when with a sudden grasp he tried
to seize them, winds whirled them high above his reach.

The Sibyl now warned AEneas that it was time to turn from these
melancholy regions and seek the city of the blessed. They passed
through a middle tract of darkness, and came upon the Elysian
fields, the groves where the happy reside.  They breathed a freer
air, and saw all objects clothed in a purple light.  The region
has a sun and stars of its own.  The inhabitants were enjoying
themselves in various ways, some in sports on the grassy turf, in
games of strength or skill, others dancing or singing.  Orpheus
struck the chords of his lyre, and called forth ravishing sounds.
Here AEneas saw the founders of the Trojan state, high-souled
heroes who lived in happier times.  He gazed with admiration on
the war-chariots and glittering arms now reposing in disuse.
Spears stood fixed in the ground, and the horses, unharnessed,
roamed over the plain.  The same pride in splendid armor and
generous steeds which the old heroes felt in life, accompanied
them here.  He saw another group feasting, and listening to the
strains of music.  They were in a laurel grove, whence the great
river Po has its origin, and flows out among men.  Here dwelt
those who fell by wounds received in their country's cause, holy
priests, also, and poets who have uttered thoughts worthy of
Apollo, and others who have contributed to cheer and adorn life
by their discoveries in the useful arts, and have made their
memory blessed by rendering service to mankind.  They wore snow-
white fillets about their brows.  The Sibyl addressed a group of
these, and inquired where Anchises was to be found.  They were
directed where to seek him, and soon found him in a verdant
valley, where he was contemplating the ranks of his posterity,
their destinies and worthy deeds to be achieved in coming times.
When he recognized AEneas approaching, he stretched out both
hands to him, while tears flowed freely.  "Have you come at
last," said he, "long expected and do I behold you after such
perils past?  O my son, how have I trembled for you as I have
watched your career!"  To which AEneas replied, O father!  Your
image was always before me to guide and guard me.  Then he
endeavored to enfold his father in his embrace, but his arms
enclosed only an unsubstantial image.

AEneas perceived before him a spacious valley, with trees gently
waving to the wind, a tranquil landscape, through which the river
Lethe flowed.  Along the banks of the stream wandered a countless
multitude, numerous as insects in the summer air.  AEneas, with
surprise, inquired who were these.  Anchises answered, "They are
souls to which bodies are to be given in due time.  Meanwhile
they dwell on Lethe's bank, and drink oblivion of their former
lives."  "Oh, father!" said AEneas, "is it possible that any can
be so in love with life, as to wish to leave these tranquil seats
for the upper world?"  Anchises replied by explaining the plan of
creation.  The Creator, he told him, originally made the material
of which souls are composed, of the four elements, fire, air,
earth, and water, all which, when united, took the form of the
most excellent part, fire, and became FLAME.  This material was
scattered like seed among the heavenly bodies, the sun, moon, and
stars.  Of this seed the inferior gods created man and all other
animals, mingling it with various proportions of earth, by which
its purity was alloyed and reduced.  Thus the more earth
predominates in the composition, the less pure is the individual;
and we see men and women with their full-grown bodies have not
the purity of childhood.  So in proportion to the time which the
union of body and soul has lasted, is the impurity contracted by
the spiritual part.  This impurity must be purged away after
death, which is done by ventilating the souls in the current of
winds, or merging them in water, or burning out their impurities
by fire.  Some few, of whom Anchises intimates that he is one,
are admitted at once to Elysium, there to remain.  But the rest,
after the impurities of earth are purged away, are sent back to
life endowed with new bodies, having had the remembrance of their
former lives effectually washed away by the waters of Lethe.
Some, however, there still are, so thoroughly corrupted, that
they are not fit to be entrusted with human bodies, and these are
made into brute animals, lions, tigers, cats, dogs, monkeys, etc.
This is what the ancients called Metempsychosis, or the
transmigration of souls; a doctrine which is still held by the
natives of India, who scruple to destroy the life, even of the
most insignificant animal, not knowing but it may be one of their
relations in an altered form.

Anchises, having explained so much, proceeded to point out to
AEneas individuals of his race, who were hereafter to be born,
and to relate to him the exploits they should perform in the
world.  After this he reverted to the present, and told his son
of the events that remained to him to be accomplished before the
complete establishment of himself and his followers in Italy.
Wars were to be waged, battles fought, a bride to be won, and in
the result a Trojan state founded, from which should rise the
Roman power, to be in time the sovereign of the world.

AEneas and the Sybil then took leave of Anchises, and returned by
some short cut, which the poet does not explain, to the upper
world.

The Egyptian name of Hades was Amenti.  In the Revision of the
Scriptures the Revising Commission has substituted the word Hades
where "hell" was used in the version of King James.

ELYSIUM

Virgil, we have seen, places his Elysium under the earth, and
assigns it for a residence to the spirits of the blessed.  But in
Homer Elysium forms no part of the realms of the dead.  He places
it on the west of the earth, near Ocean, and described it as a
happy land, where there is neither snow, nor cold, nor rain, and
always fanned by the delightful breezes of Zephyrus.  Hither
favored heroes pass without dying, and live happy under the rule
of Rhadamanthus.  The Elysium of Hesiod and Pindar is in the
Isles of the Blessed, or Fortunate Islands, in the Western Ocean.
>From these sprang the legend of the happy island Atlantis.  This
blissful region may have been wholly imaginary, but possibly may
have sprung from the reports of some storm-driven mariners who
had caught a glimpse of the coast of America.

James Russell Lowell, in one of his shorter poems, claims for the
present age some of the privileges of that happy realm.
Addressing the Past, he says,

"Whatever of true life there was in thee,
Leaps in our age's veins.
.    .    .    .    .    .
"Here, 'mid the bleak waves of our strife and care,
Float the green 'Fortunate Isles,'
Where all thy hero-spirits dwell and share
Our martyrdoms and toils.
The present moves attended
With all of brave and excellent and fair
That made the old time splendid."

Milton alludes to the same fable in Paradise Lost, Book III.,
1.568.

"Like those Hesperian gardens famed of old,
Fortunate fields and groves and flowery vales,
Thrice happy isles."

And in Book II. he characterizes the rivers of Erebus according
to the meaning of their names in the Greek language:

"Abhorred Styx, the flood of deadly hate,
Sad Acheron of sorrow black and deep;
Cocytus named of lamentation loud
Heard on the rueful stream; fierce Phlegethon
Whose waves of torrent fire inflame with rage.
Far off from these a slow and silent stream.
Lethe, the river of oblivion, rolls
Her watery labyrinth, whereof who drinks
Forthwith his former state and being forgets,
Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain."

THE SIBYL

As AEneas and the Sibyl pursued their way back to earth, he said
to her, "Whether thou be a goddess or a mortal beloved by the
gods, by me thou shalt always be held in reverence.  When I reach
the upper air, I will cause a temple to be built to thy honor,
and will myself bring offerings."  "I am no goddess," said the
Sibyl; "I have no claim to sacrifice or offering.  I am mortal;
yet if I could have accepted the love of Apollo, I might have
been immortal.  He promised me the fulfilment of my wish, if I
would consent to be his.  I took a handful of sand, and holding
it forth, said, 'Grant me to see as many birthdays as there are
sand-grains in my hand.'  Unluckily I forgot to ask for enduring
youth.  This also he would have granted, could I have accepted
his love, but offended at my refusal, he allowed me to grow old.
My youth and youthful strength fled long ago.  I have lived seven
hundred years, and to equal the number of the sand-grains, I have
still to see three hundred springs and three hundred harvests.
My body shrinks up as years increase, and in time, I shall be
lost to sight, but my voice will remain, and future ages will
respect my sayings."

These concluding words of the Sibyl alluded to her prophetic
power.  In her cave she was accustomed to inscribe on leaves
gathered from the trees the names and fates of individuals.  The
leaves thus inscribed were arranged in order within the cave, and
might be consulted by her votaries.   But if perchance at the
opening of the door the wind rushed in and dispersed the leaves,
the Sibyl gave no aid to restoring them again, and the oracle was
irreparably lost.

The following legend of the Sibyl is fixed at a later date.  In
the reign of one of the Tarquins there appeared before the king a
woman who offered him nine books for sale.  The king refused to
purchase them, whereupon the woman went away and burned three of
the books, and returning offered the remaining books for the same
price she had asked for the nine.  The king again rejected them;
but when the woman, after burning three books more, returned and
asked for the three remaining the same price which she had before
asked for the nine, his curiosity was excited, and he purchased
the books.  They were found to contain the destinies of the Roman
state.  They were kept in the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus,
preserved in a stone chest, and allowed to be inspected only by
especial officers appointed for that duty, who on great occasions
consulted them and interpreted their oracles to the people.

There were various Sibyls; but the Cumaean Sibyl, of whom Ovid
and Virgil write, is the most celebrated of them.  Ovid's story
of her life protracted to one thousand years may be intended to
represent the various Sibyls as being only reappearances of one
and the same individual.

It is now believed that some of the most distinguished Sibyls
took the inspiration of their oracles from the Jewish scripture.
Readers interested in this subject will consult, "Judaism," by
Prof. F. Huidekoper.

Young, in the Night Thoughts, alludes to the Sibyl.  Speaking of
worldly Wisdom, he says:

"If future fate she plans 'tis all in leaves,
Like Sibyl, unsubstantial, fleeting bliss;
At the first blast it vanishes in air.
     .    .    .    .    .
As worldly schemes resemble Sibyl's leaves,
The good man's days to Sibyl's books compare,
The price still rising as in number less."


Chapter XXVI
Camilla   Evander   Nisus and Euryalus   Mezentius   Turnus

AEneas, having parted from the Sibyl and rejoined his fleet,
coasted along the shores of Italy and cast anchor in the mouth of
the Tiber.  The poet Virgil, having brought his hero to this
spot, the destined termination of his wanderings, invokes his
Muse to tell him the situation of things at that eventful moment.
Latinus, third in descent from Saturn, ruled the country.  He was
now old and had no male descendant, but had one charming
daughter, Lavinia, who was sought in marriage by many neighboring
chiefs, one of whom, Turnus, king of the Rutulians, was favored
by the wishes of her parents.  But Latinus had been warned in a
dream by his father Faunus, that the destined husband of Lavinia
should come from a foreign land.  From that union should spring a
race destined to subdue the world.

Our readers will remember that in the conflict with the Harpies,
one of those half-human birds had threatened the Trojans with
dire sufferings.  In particular she predicted that before their
wanderings ceased they should be pressed by hunger to devour
their tables.  This portent now came true; for as they took their
scanty meal, seated on the grass, the men placed their hard
biscuit on their laps, and put thereon whatever their gleanings
in the woods supplied.  Having dispatched the latter they
finished by eating the crusts.  Seeing which, the boy Iulus said
playfully, "See, we are eating our tables."  AEneas caught the
words and accepted the omen.  "All hail, promised land!" he
exclaimed, "this is our home, this our country!"  He then took
measures to find out who were the present inhabitants of the
land, and who their rulers.  A hundred chosen men were sent to
the village of Latinus, bearing presents and a request for
friendship and alliance.  They went and were favorably received.
Latinus immediately concluded that the Trojan hero was no other
than the promised son-in-law announced by the oracle.  He
cheerfully granted his alliance and sent back the messengers
mounted on steeds from his stables, and loaded with gifts and
friendly messages.

Juno, seeing things go thus prosperously for the Trojans, felt
her old animosity revive, summoned the Fury Alecto from Erebus,
and sent her to stir up discord.  The Fury first took possession
of the queen, Amata, and roused her to oppose in every way the
new alliance.  Alecto then sped to the city of Turnus, and
assuming the form of an old priestess, informed him of the
arrival of the foreigners and of the attempts of their prince to
rob him of his bride.  Next she turned her attention to the camp
of the Trojans.  There she saw the boy Iulus and his companions
amusing themselves with hunting.  She sharpened the scent of the
dogs, and led them to rouse up from the thicket a tame stag, the
favorite of Silvia, the daughter of Tyrrheus, the king's
herdsman.  A javelin from the hand of Iulus wounded the animal,
and he had only strength left to run homewards, and died at his
mistress' feet.  Her cries and tears roused her brothers and the
herdsmen, and they, seizing whatever weapons came to hand,
furiously assaulted the hunting party.  These were protected by
their friends, and the herdsmen were finally driven back with the
loss of two of their number.

These things were enough to rouse the storm of war, and the
queen, Turnus, and the peasants, all urged the old king to drive
the strangers from the country.  He resisted as long as he could,
but finding his opposition unavailing, finally gave way and
retreated to his retirement.

OPENING THE GATES OF JANUS

It was the custom of the country, when war was to be undertaken,
for the chief magistrate, clad in his robes of office, with
solemn pomp to open the gates of the temple of Janus, which were
kept shut as long as peace endured.  His people now urged the old
king to perform that solemn office, but he refused to do so.
While they contested, Juno herself, descending from the skies,
smote the doors with irresistible force and burst them open.
Immediately the whole country was in a flame.  The people rushed
from every side breathing nothing but war.

Turnus was recognized by all as leader; others joined as allies,
chief of whom was Mezentius, a brave and able soldier, but of
detestable cruelty.  He had been the chief of one of the
neighboring cities, but his people drove him out.  With him was
joined his son Lausus, a generous youth worthy of a better sire.

CAMILLA

Camilla, the favorite of Diana, a huntress and warrior, after the
fashion of the Amazons, came with her band of mounted followers,
including a select number of her own sex, and ranged herself on
the side of Turnus.  This maiden had never accustomed her fingers
to the distaff or the loom, but had learned to endure the toils
of war, and in speed to outstrip the wind.  It seemed as if she
might run over the standing corn without crushing it, or over the
surface of the water without dipping her feet.  Camilla's history
had been singular from the beginning.  Her father, Metabus,
driven from his city by civil discord, carried with him in his
flight his infant daughter.  As he fled through the woods, his
enemies in hot pursuit, he reached the bank of the river
Amazenus, which, swelled by rains, seemed to debar a passage.  He
paused for a moment, then decided what to do.  He tied the infant
to his lance with wrappers of bark, and, poising the weapon in
his upraised hand, thus addressed Diana: "Goddess of the woods!
I consecrate this maid to you;" then hurled the weapon with its
burden to the opposite bank.  The spear flew across the roaring
water.  His pursuers were already upon him, but he plunged into
the river and swam across, and found the spear with the infant
safe on the other side.  Thenceforth he lived among the
shepherds, and brought up his daughter in woodland arts.  While a
child she was taught to use the bow and throw the javelin.  With
her sling she could bring down the crane or the wild swan.  Her
dress was a tiger's skin.  Many mothers sought her for a
daughter-in-law, but she continued faithful to Diana,  and
repelled the thought of marriage.

There is an allusion to Camilla in those well-known lines of
Pope, in which, illustrating the rule that "the sound should be
an echo to the sense," he says,

"When Ajax strives some rock's vast weight to throw,
The line too labors and the words move slow.
Not so when swift Camilla scours the plain,
Flies o'er th'unbendng corn or skims along the main."
Essay on Criticism

EVANDER

Such were the formidable allies that ranged themselves against
AEneas.  It was night, and he lay stretched in sleep on the bank
of the river, under the open heavens.  The god of the stream,
Father Tiber, seemed to raise his head above the willows, and to
say, "O goddess-born, destined possessor of the Latin realms,
this is the promised land, here is to be your home, here shall
terminate the hostility of the heavenly powers, if only you
faithfully persevere.  There are friends not far distant.
Prepare your boats and row up my stream; I will lead you to
Evander the Arcadian chief.  He has long been at strife with
Turnus and the Rutulians, and is prepared to become an ally of
yours.  Rise!  Offer your vows to Juno, and deprecate her anger.
When you have achieved your victory then think of me."  AEneas
woke and paid immediate obedience to the friendly vision.  He
sacrificed to Juno, and invoked the god of the river and all its
tributary fountains to lend their aid.  Then, for the first time,
a vessel filled with armed warriors floated on the stream of the
Tiber.  The river smoothed its waves and bade its current flow
gently, while, impelled by the vigorous strokes of the rowers,
the vessel shot rapidly up the stream.

About the middle of the day they came in sight of the scattered
buildings of the infant town where in after times the proud city
of Rome grew, whose glory reached the skies.  By chance the old
king, Evander, was that day celebrating annual solemnities in
honor of Hercules and all the gods.  Pallas, his son, and all the
chiefs of the little commonwealth stood by.  When they saw the
tall ship gliding onward through the wood, they were alarmed at
the sight, and rose from the tables.  But Pallas forbade the
solemnities to be interrupted, and seizing a weapon, stepped
forward to the river's bank.  He called aloud, demanding who they
were and what was their object.  AEneas, holding forth an olive-
branch, replied, "We are Trojans, friends to you and enemies to
the Rutulians.  We seek Evander, and offer to join our arms with
yours."  Pallas, in amazement at the sound of so great a name,
invited them to land, and when AEneas touched the shore he seized
his hand and held it long in friendly grasp.  Proceeding through
the wood they joined the king and his party, and were most
favorably received.  Seats were provided for them at the tables,
and the repast proceeded.

When the solemnities were ended all moved towards the city.  The
king, bending with age, walked between his son and AEneas, taking
the arm of one or the other of them, and with much variety of
pleasing talk shortening the way.  AEneas looked and listened
with delight, observing all the beauties of the scene, and
learning much of heroes renowned in ancient times.  Evander said,
"These extensive groves were once inhabited by fauns and nymphs,
and a rude race of men who sprang from the trees themselves, and
had neither laws nor social culture.  They knew not how to yoke
the cattle nor raise a harvest, nor provide from present
abundance for future want; but browsed like beasts upon the leafy
boughs, or fed voraciously on their hunted prey.  Such were they
when Saturn, expelled from Olympus by his sons, came among them
and drew together the fierce savages, formed them into society,
and gave them laws.  Such peace and plenty ensued that men ever
since have called his reign the golden age; but by degrees far
other times succeeded, and the thirst of gold and the thirst of
blood prevailed.  The land was a prey to successive tyrants, till
fortune and resistless destiny brought me hither, an exile from
my native land, Arcadia."

Having thus said, he showed him the Tarpeian rock, and the rude
spot then overgrown with bushes where in after times the Capitol
rose in all its magnificence.  He next pointed to some dismantled
walls, and said, "Here stood Janiculum, built by Janus, and there
Saturnia, the town of Saturn."  Such discourse brought them to
the cottage of poor Evander, whence they saw the lowing herds
roaming over the plain where now the proud and stately Forum
stands.  They entered, and a couch was spread for AEneas, well
stuffed with leaves and covered with the skin of the Libyan bear.

Next morning, awakened by the dawn and the shrill song of birds
beneath the eaves of his low mansion, old Evander rose.  Clad in
a tunic, and a panther's skin thrown over his shoulders, with
sandals on his feet, and his good sword girded to his side, he
went forth to seek his guest.  Two mastiffs followed him, his
whole retinue and body-guard.  He round the hero attended by his
faithful Achates, and, Pallas soon joining them, the old king
spoke thus:

"Illustrious Trojan, it is but little we can do in so great a
cause.  Our state is feeble, hemmed in on one side by the river,
on the other by the Rutulians.  But I propose to ally you with a
people numerous and rich, to whom fate has brought you at the
propitious moment.  The Etruscans hold the country beyond the
river.  Mezentius was their king, a monster of cruelty, who
invented unheard-of torments to gratify his vengeance.  He would
fasten the dead to the living, hand to hand and face to face, and
leave the wretched victims to die in that dreadful embrace.  At
length the people cast him out, him and his house.  They burned
his palace and slew his friends.  He escaped and took refuge with
Turnus, who protects him with arms.  The Etruscans' demand that
he shall be given up to deserved punishment, and would ere now
have attempted to enforce their demand; but their priests
restrain then, telling them that it is the will of heaven that no
native of the land shall guide them to victory, and that their
destined leader must come from across the sea.  They have offered
the crown to me, but I am too old to undertake such great
affairs, and my son is native-born, which precludes him from the
choice.  You, equally by birth and time of life, and fame in
arms, pointed out by the gods, have but to appear to be hailed as
their leader.  With you I will join Pallas, my son, my only hope
and comfort.  Under you he shall learn the art of war, and strive
to emulate your great exploits."

Then the king ordered horses to be furnished for the Trojan
chiefs, and AEneas, with a chosen band of followers and Pallas
accompanying, mounted and took the way to the Etruscan city,
having sent back the rest of his party in the ships.  AEneas and
his band safely arrived at the Etruscan camp and were received
with open arms by Tarchon, the Etruscan leader, and his
countrymen.

NISUS AND EURYALUS

In the meanwhile Turnus had collected his bands and made all
necessary preparations for the war.  Juno sent Iris to him with a
message inciting him to take advantage of the absence of AEneas
and surprise the Trojan camp.  Accordingly the attempt was made,
but the Trojans were found on their guard, and having received
strict orders from AEneas not to fight in his absence, they lay
still in their intrenchments, and resisted all the efforts of the
Rutulians to draw them in to the field.  Night coming on, the
army of Turnus in high spirits at their fancied superiority,
feasted and enjoyed themselves, and finally stretched themselves
on the field and slept secure.

In the camp of the Trojans things were far otherwise.  There all
was watchfulness and anxiety, and impatience for AEneas's return.
Nisus stood guard at the entrance of the camp, and Euryalus, a
youth distinguished above all in the army for graces of person
and fine qualities, was with him.  These two were friends and
brothers in arms.  Nisus said to his friend, "Do you perceive
what confidence and carelessness the enemy display?  Their lights
are few and dim, and the men seem all oppressed with wine or
sleep.  You know how anxiously our chiefs wish to send to AEneas,
and to get intelligence from him.  Now I am strongly moved to
make my way through the enemy's camp and to go in search of our
chief.  If I succeed, the glory of the deed will be enough reward
for me, and if they judge the service deserves anything more, let
them pay it to you."

Euryalus, all on fire with the love of adventure, replied, "Would
you then, Nisus, refuse to share your enterprise with me?  And
shall I let you go into such danger alone?  Not so my brave
father brought me up, nor so have I planned for myself when I
joined the standard of AEneas, and resolved to hold my life cheap
in comparison with honor."  Nisus replied, "I doubt it not, my
friend; but you know the uncertain event of such an undertaking,
and whatever may happen to me, I wish you to be safe.  You are
younger than I and have more of life in prospect.  Nor can I be
the cause of such grief to your mother, who has chosen to be here
in the camp with you rather than stay and live in peace with the
other matrons in Acestes' city."  Euryalus replied, "Say no more.
In vain you seek arguments to dissuade me.  I am fixed in the
resolution to go with you.  Let us lose no time."  They called
the guard, and committing the watch to them, sought the general's
tent.  They found the chief officers in consultation,
deliberating how they should send notice to AEneas of their
situation.  The offer of the two friends was gladly accepted,
they themselves were loaded with praises and promised the most
liberal rewards in case of success.  Iulus especially addressed
Euryalus, assuring him of his lasting friendship.  Euryalus
replied, "I have but one boon to ask.  My aged mother is with me
in the camp.    For me she left the Trojan soil, and would not
stay behind with the other matrons at the city of Acestes.  I go
now without taking leave of her.  I could not bear her tears nor
set at   nought he entreaties.  But do thou, I beseech thee,
comfort her in her distress.  Promise me that, and I shall go
more boldly into whatever dangers may present themselves."  Iulus
and the other chiefs were moved to tears, and promised to do all
his request.  "Your mother shall be mine," said Iulus, "and all
that I have promised to you shall be made good to her, if you do
not return to receive it."

The two friends left the camp and plunged at once into the midst
of the enemy.  They found no watch, no sentinels posted, but all
about, the sleeping soldiers strewn on the grass and among the
wagons.  The laws of war at that early day did not forbid a brave
man to slay a sleeping foe, and the two Trojans slew, as they
passed, such of the enemy as they could without exciting alarm.
In one tent Euryalus made prize of a helmet brilliant with gold
and plumes.  They had passed through the enemy's ranks without
being discovered, but now suddenly appeared a troop directly in
front of them, which, under Volscens, their leader, were
approaching the camp.  The glittering helmet of Euryalus caught
their attention, and Volscens hailed the two, and demanded who
and whence they were.  They made no answer, but plunged into the
wood.  The horsemen scattered in all directions to intercept
their flight.  Nisus had eluded pursuit and was out of danger,
but Euryalus being missing he turned back to seek him.  He again
entered the wood and soon came within sound of voices.  Looking
through the thicket he saw the whole band surrounding Euryalus
with noisy questions.  What should he do?  How extricate the
youth?  Or would it be better to die with him?

Raising his eyes to the moon which now shone clear, he said,
"Goddess!  Favor my effort!"  And aiming his javelin at one of
the leaders of the troop, struck him in the back and stretched
him on the plain with a death-blow.  In the midst of their
amazement another weapon flew, and another of the party fell
dead.  Volscens, the leader, ignorant whence the darts came,
rushed sword in hand upon Euryalus.  "You shall pay the penalty
of both," he said, and would have plunged the sword into his
bosom, when Nisus, who from his concealment saw the peril of his
friend, rushed forward, exclaiming, "'Twas I, 'twas I; turn your
swords against me, Rutulians; I did it; he only followed me as a
friend."  While he spoke the sword fell, and pierced the comely
bosom of Euryalus.  His head fell over on his shoulder, like a
flower cut down by the plough.  Nisus rushed upon Volscens and
plunged his sword into his body, and was himself slain on the
instant by numberless blows.

MEZENTIUS

AEneas, with his Etrurian allies, arrived on the scene of action
in time to rescue his beleaguered camp; and now the two armies
being nearly equal in strength, the war began in good earnest.
We cannot find space for all the details, but must simply record
the fate of the principal characters whom we have introduced to
our readers.  The tyrant Mezentius, finding himself engaged
against his revolted subjects, raged like a wild beast.  He slew
all who dared to withstand him, and put the multitude to flight
wherever he appeared.  At last he encountered AEneas, and the
armies stood still to see the issue.  Mezentius threw his spear,
which striking AEneas's shield glanced off and hit Anthor.  He
was a Grecian by birth, who had left Argos, his native city, and
followed Evander into Italy.  The poet says of him, with simple
pathos which has made the words proverbial, "He fell, unhappy, by
a wound intended for another, looked up to the skies, and dying
remembered sweet Argos."  AEneas now in turn hurled his lance.
It pierced the shield of Mezentius, and wounded him in the thigh.
Lausus, his son, could not bear the sight, but rushed forward and
interposed himself, while the followers pressed round Mezentius
and bore him away.  AEneas held his sword suspended over Lausus
and delayed to strike, but the furious youth pressed on and he
was compelled to deal the fatal blow.  Lausus fell, and AEneas
bent over him in pity.  "Hapless youth," he said, "what can I do
for you worthy of your praise?  Keep those arms in which you
glory, and fear not but that your body shall be restored to your
friends, and have due funeral honors."  So saying, he called the
timid followers, and delivered the body into their hands.

Mezentius meanwhile had been borne to the river-side, and washed
his wound.  Soon the news reached him of Lausus's death, and rage
and despair supplied the place of strength.  He mounted his horse
and dashed into the thickest of the fight, seeking AEneas.
Having found him, he rode round him in a circle, throwing one
javelin after another, while Aeneas stood fenced with his shield,
turning every way to meet them.   At last, after Mezentius had
three times made the circuit, AEneas threw his lance directly at
the horse's head.  It pierced his temples and he fell, while a
shout from both armies rent the skies.  Mezentius asked no mercy,
but only that his body might be spared the insults of his
revolted subjects, and be buried in the same grave with his son.
He received the fatal stroke not unprepared, and poured out his
life and his blood together.

While these things were doing in one part of the field, in
another Turnus encountered the youthful Pallas.  The contest
between champions so unequally matched could not be doubtful.
Pallas bore himself bravely, but fell by the lance of Turnus.
The victor almost relented when he saw the brave youth lying dead
at his feet, and spared to use the privilege of a conqueror in
despoiling him of his arms.  The belt only, adorned with studs
and carvings of gold, he took and clasped round his own body.
The rest he remitted to the friends of the slain.

After the battle there was a cessation of arms for some days to
allow both armies to bury their dead.  In this interval AEneas
challenged Turnus to decide the contest by single combat, but
Turnus evaded the challenge.  Another battle ensued, in which
Camilla, the virgin warrior, was chiefly conspicuous.  Her deeds
of valor surpassed those of the bravest warriors, and many
Trojans and Etruscans fell pierced with her darts or struck down
by her battle-axe.  At last an Etruscan named Aruns, who had
watched her long, seeking for some advantage, observed her
pursuing a flying enemy whose splendid armor offered a tempting
prize.  Intent on the chase she observed not her danger, and the
javelin of Aruns struck her and inflicted a fatal wound.  She
fell and breathed her last in the arms of her attendant maidens.
But Diana, who beheld her fate, suffered not her slaughter to be
unavenged.  Aruns, as he stole away, glad but frightened, was
struck by a secret arrow, launched by one of the nymphs of
Diana's train, and died ignobly and unknown.

At length the final conflict took place between AEneas and
Turnus.  Turnus had avoided the contest as long as he could, but
at last impelled by the ill success of his arms, and by the
murmurs of his followers, he braced himself to the conflict.  It
could not be doubtful.  On the side of AEneas were the expressed
decree of destiny, the aid of his goddess-mother at every
emergency, and impenetrable armor fabricated by Vulcan, at Venus'
request, for her son.  Turnus, on the other hand, was deserted by
his celestial allies, Juno having been expressly forbidden by
Jupiter to assist him any longer.  Turnus threw his lance, but it
recoiled harmless from the shield of AEneas.  The Trojan hero
then threw his, which penetrated the shield of Turnus, and
pierced his thigh.  Then Turnus' fortitude forsook him and he
begged for mercy; and AEneas would have given him his life, but
at the instant his eye fell on the belt of Pallas, which Turnus
had taken from the slaughtered youth.  Instantly his rage
revived, and exclaiming, "Pallas immolates thee with this blow,"
he thrust him through with his sword.

Here the AEneid closes, but the story goes that AEneas, having
triumphed over his foes, obtained Lavinia as his bride.  His son
Iulus founded the city of Alba Longa.  He, and his descendants
after him, reigned over the town for many years.  At length
Numitor and Amulius, two brothers, quarrelled about the kingdom.
Amulius seized the crown by force, cast out Numitor, and made his
daughter, Rhea Silvia, a Vestal Virgin.  The Vestal Virgins, the
priestesses of the goddess Vesta, were sworn to celibacy.  But
Rhea Silvia broke her vow, and gave birth, by the god Mars, to
the twins, Romulus and Remus.  For this offence she was buried
alive, the usual punishment accorded to unfaithful Vestals, while
the children were exposed on the river Tiber.  Romulus and Remus,
however, were rescued by a herdsman, and were educated among the
shepherds in ignorance of their parentage.  But chance revealed
it to them.  They collected a band of friends, and took revenge
on their granduncle for the murder of their mother.  Afterwards
they founded, by the side of the river Tiber, where they had been
exposed in infancy, the city of Rome.


Chapter XXVII
Pythagoras.   Egyptian Deities.   Oracles

The teachings of Anchises to AEneas, respecting the nature of the
human soul, were in conformity with the doctrines of the
Pythagoreans.  Pythagoras (born, perhaps, about five hundred and
forty years B.C.) was a native of the island of Samos, but passed
the chief portion of his life at Crotona in Italy.  He is
therefore sometimes called "the Samian," and sometimes "the
philosopher of Crotona."  When young he travelled extensively and
is said to have visited Egypt, where he was instructed by the
priests in all their learning, and afterwards journeyed to the
East, and visited the Persian and Chaldean Magi, and the Brahmins
of India.

But Pythagoras left no writings which have been preserved.  His
immediate disciples were under a pledge of secrecy.  Though he is
referred to by many writers, at times not far distant from his
own, we have no biography of him written earlier than the end of
the second century of our era.  In the interval between his life
and this time, every sort of fable collected around what was
really known of his life and teaching.

At Crotona, where he finally established himself, it is said that
his extraordinary qualities collected round him a great number of
disciples.  The inhabitants were notorious for luxury and
licentiousness, but the good effects of his influence were soon
visible.  Sobriety and temperance succeeded.  Six hundred of the
inhabitants became his disciples and enrolled themselves in a
society to aid each other in the pursuit of wisdom; uniting their
property in one common stock, for the benefit of the whole.  They
were required to practise the greatest purity and simplicity of
manners.  The first lesson they learned was SILENCE; for a time
they were required to be only hearers.  "He (Pythagoras) said
so," (Ipse dixit,) was to be held by them as sufficient, without
any proof.  It was only the advanced pupils, after years of
patient submission, who were allowed to ask questions and to
state objections.

Pythagoras is said to have considered NUMBERS as the essence and
principle of all things, and attributed to them a real and
distinct existence; so that, in his view, they were the elements
out of which the universe was constructed.  How he conceived this
process has never been satisfactorily explained.  He traced the
various forms and phenomena of the world to numbers as their
basis and essence.  The "Monad," or UNIT, he regarded as the
source of all numbers.  The number TWO was imperfect, and the
cause of increase and division.  THREE was called the number of
the whole, because it had a beginning, middle, and end; FOUR,
representing the square, is in the highest degree perfect; and
TEN, as it contains the sum of the first three prime numbers
(2+3+5=10.  ONE is not counted, as being rather the source of
number than a number itself) comprehends all musical and
arithmetical proportions, and denotes the system of the world.

As the numbers proceed frm the Monad, so he regarded the pure and
simple essence of the Deity as the source of all the forms of
nature.  Gods, demons, and heroes are emanations of the Supreme;
and there is a fourth emanation, the human soul.  This is
immortal, and when freed from the fetters of the body, passes to
the habitation of the dead, where it remains till it returns to
the world to dwell in some other human or animal body, and at
last, when sufficiently purified, it returns to the source from
which it proceeded.  This doctrine of the transmigration of souls
(metempsychosis), which was first Indian and Egyptian, and
connected with the doctrine of reward and punishment of human
actions, was the chief cause why the Pythagoreans killed no
animals.  Ovid represents Pythagoras addressing his disciples in
these words: "Souls never die, but always on quitting one abode
pass to another.  I myself can remember that in the time of the
Trojan was I was Euphorbus, the son of Panthus, and fell by the
spear of Menelaus.  Lately, being in the temple of Juno, at
Argos, I recognized my shield hung up there among the trophies.
All things change, nothing perishes.  The soul passes hither and
thither, occupying now this body, now that, passing from the body
of a beast into that of a man, and thence to a beast's again.  As
wax is stamped with certain figures, then melted, then stamped
anew with others, yet is always the same wax, so the soul, being
always the same, yet wears at different times different forms.
Therefore, if the love of kindred is not extinct in your bosoms,
forbear, I entreat you, to violate the life of those who may
haply be your own relatives."

Shakespeare, in the Merchant of Venice, makes Gratiano allude to
the metempsychosis, where he says to Shylock:

"Thou almost mak'st me waver in my faith,
To hold opinion with Pythagoras,
That souls of animals infuse themselves
Into the trunks of men; thy currish spirit
Governed a wolf; who hanged for human slaughter
Infused his soul in thee; for thy desires
Are wolfish, bloody, starved, and ravenous."

The relation of the notes of the musical scale to numbers,
whereby harmony results from vibrations in equal times, and
discord from the reverse, led Pythagoras to apply the word
"harmony" to the visible creation, meaning by it the just
adaptation of parts to each other.  This is the idea which Dryden
expresses in the beginning of his song for St. Cecilia's Day:

"From harmony, from heavenly harmony
This everlasting frame began;
>From harmony to harmony
Through all the compass of the notes it ran,
The Diapason closing full in Man."

In the centre of the universe (as Pythagoras taught) there was a
central fire, the principle of life.  The central fire was
surrounded by the earth, the moon, the sun, and the five planets.
The distances of the various heavenly bodies from one another
were conceived to correspond to the proportions of the musical
scale.  The heavenly bodies, with the gods who inhabited them,
were supposed to perform a choral dance round the central fire,
"not without song."  It is this doctrine which Shakespeare
alludes to when he makes Lorenzo teach astronomy to Jessica in
this fashion:

"Sit, Jessica, look how the floor of heaven
Is thick inlaid with patines of bright gold!
There's not the smallest orb that thou behold'st
But in this motion like an angel sings,
Still quiring to the young-eyed cherubim;
Such harmony is in immortal souls!
But whilst this muddy vesture of decay
Doth grossly close it in we cannot hear it."
Merchant of Venice

The spheres were conceived to be crystalline or glassy fabrics
arranged over one another like a nest of bowls reversed.  In the
substance of each sphere one or more of the heavenly bodies was
supposed to be fixed, so as to move with it.  As the spheres are
transparent, we look through them, and see the heavenly bodies
which they contain and carry round with them.  But as these
spheres cannot move on one another without friction, a sound is
thereby produced which is of exquisite harmony, too fine for
mortal ears to recognize.  Milton, in his Hymn to the Nativity,
thus alludes to the music of the spheres:

"Ring out, ye crystal spheres!
Once bless our human ears;
(If ye have power to charm our senses so);
And let your silver chime
Move in melodious time,
And let the base of Heaven's deep organ blow:
And with your nine-fold harmony
Make up full concert with the angelic symphony."

Pythagoras is said to have invented the lyre, of which other
fables give the invention to Mercury.  Our own poet, Longfellow,
in Verses to a Child, thus relates the story:

"As great Pythagoras of yore,
Standing beside the blacksmith's door,
And hearing the hammers as they smote
The Anvils with a different note,
Stole from the varying tones that hung
Vibrant on every iron tongue,
The secret of the sounding wire,
And formed the seven-chorded lyre."

See also the same poet's Occultation of Orion:

"The Samian's great AEolian lyre."

SYBARIS AND CROTONA

Sybaris, a neighboring city to Crotona, was as celebrated for
luxury and effeminacy as Crotona for the reverse.  The name has
become proverbial.  Lowell uses it in this sense in his charming
little poem To the Dandelion:

"Not in mild June the golden-cuirassed bee
Feels a more summer-like, warm ravishment
In the white lily's breezy tent,
(His conquered Sybaris) than I when first
>From the dark green thy yellow circles burst."

A war arose between the two cities, and Sybaris was conquered and
destroyed.  Milo, the celebrated athlete, led the army of
Crotona.  Many stories are told of Milo's vast strength, such as
his carrying a heifer of four years old upon his shoulders, and
afterwards eating the whole of it in a single day.  The mode of
his death is thus related: As he was passing through a forest he
saw the trunk of a tree which had been partially split open by
wood-cutters, and attempted to rend it further; but the wood
closed upon his hands and held him fast, in which state he was
attacked and devoured by wolves.

Byron, in his Ode to Napoleon Bonaparte, alludes to the story of
Milo:

"He who of old would rend the oak
Deemed not of the rebound;
Chained by the trunk he vainly broke,
Alone, how looked he round!"

EGYPTIAN DEITIES

The remarkable discovery by which Champollion the younger (so
called to distinguish him from his older brother, Champollion
Figeac, who also studied the hieroglyphics)) first opened to
modern times the secret of the Egyptian hieroglyphics, has been
followed up by laborious studies, which tell us more of Egyptian
worship and mythology, with more precision, than we know of any
other ancient religion but that of the Hebrews.  We have even
great numbers of copies of the liturgies, or handbooks of
worship, of funeral solemnities, and other rituals, which have
been diligently translated.  And we have a sufficient body of the
literature written and used by the priesthood.

These discoveries give to writers of this generation a much
fuller knowledge of the Egyptian religion, of its forms, and of
the names of its gods, than they had before.  It is impossible,
and probably always will be, to state with precision the theology
on which it rested.  It is impossible, because that theology was
different in one time and with one school from what it was at
other times.  Mr. S. Birch, of the British Museum, says, "The
religion of the Egyptians consisted of an extended polytheism
represented by a system of local groups."  But Mr. Pierret says,
"The polytheism of the monuments is but an outward show.  The
innumerable gods of the Pantheon are but manifestations of the
One Being in his various capacities.  Mariette Bey says, "The one
result is that according to the Egyptians, the universe was God
himself, and that Pantheism formed the foundation of their
religion."

In this book it is not necessary to reconcile views so diverse,
nor indeed to enter on studies so profound as those which should
decide between them.  For our purpose here it is enough to know
that the Sun was the older object of worship, and in his various
forms   rising, midday, or setting   was adored under different
names.  Frequently his being and these names were united to the
types of other deities.  Mr. Birch believes that the worship of
Osiris prevailed largely beside the worship of the Sun, and is
not to be confounded with it.  To Osiris, Set, the Egyptian
devil, was opposed.

The original God, the origin of all things, manifests himself to
men, in lesser forms, according to this mythology, more and more
human and less and less intangible.  These forms are generally
triads, and resolve themselves into a male deity, a female deity,
and their child.  Triad after triad brings the original Divinity
into forms more and more earthly, till at last we find "that we
have no longer to do with the infinite and intangible God of the
earliest days, but rather with a God of flesh and blood, who
lives upon earth, and has so abased himself as to be no more than
a human king.  It is no longer the God of whom no man knew either
the form or the substance: it is Kneph at Esneh,   Hathor at
Durderah,   Horus, king of the divine dynasty at Edfoo."  These
words are M. Maspero's.

The Greek and Latin poets and philosophers, as they made some
very slight acquaintance with Egyptian worship, give Greek or
Latin names to the divinities worshipped.  Thus we sometimes hear
Osiris spoken of as the Egyptian Hermes.  But such changes of
names are confusing, and are at best but fanciful (In the same
way Plutarch, a Greek writer, says of the Jews' Feast of
Tabernacles, "I know that their God is our Bacchus."  This was
merely from the vines, vine leaves and wine used in the
ceremonies.)  It would happen sometimes, in later times, that a
fashion of religion would carry the worship of one God or Goddess
to a distance.  Thus the worship of Isis became fashionable in
Rome in the time of Nero and Paul, as readers of Bulwer's Last
Days of Pompeii will remember.

The latest modern literature occasionally uses the Egyptian
names, as the last two centuries have disinterred them from the
inscriptions on the monuments, and from the manuscripts in the
tombs.  Earlier English writers generally use the names like
Osiris, Anubis, and others found in Latin and Greek writers.

The following statement as to these deities and their names is
from Mr. Birch:

"The deities of ancient Egypt consist of celestial, terrestrial,
and infernal gods, and of many inferior personages, either
representatives of the greater gods or attendants on them.  Most
of the gods were connected with the sun, and represented that
luminary through the upper hemisphere or Heaven and the lower
hemisphere or Hades.  To the deities of the solar cycle belonged
the great gods of Thebes and Heliopolis.  In the local worship of
Egypt the deities were arranged in local triads; thus at Memphis,
Ptah, his wife Merienptah, and their son Nefer Atum, formed a
triad, to which was sometimes added the goddess Bast or Bubastis.
At Abydos the local triad was Osiris, Isis, and Horus, with
Nephthys; at Thebes, Amen Ra or Ammon, Mut and Chons, with Neith;
at Elephantine, Kneph, Anuka, Sati, and Hak.  In most instances
the names of the gods are Egyptian; thus, Ptah meant 'the
opener'; Amen, 'the concealed'; Ra, 'the sun or day'; Athor, 'the
house of Horus';' but some few, especially of later times, were
introduced from Semitic sources, as Bal or Baal, Astaruta or
Astarte, Khen or Kiun, Respu or Reseph.  Besides the principal
gods, several inferior or parhedral gods, sometimes
personifications of the faculties, senses, and other objects, are
introduced into the religious system, and genii, spirits or
personified souls of deities formed part of the same.  At a
period subsequent to their first introduction the gods were
divided into three orders.  The first or highest comprised eight
deities, who were different in the Memphian and Theban systems.
They were supposed to have reigned over Egypt before the time of
mortals.  The eight gods of the first order at Memphis were   1.
Ptah; 2. Shu; 3. Tefnu; 4. Seb; 5. Nut; 6. Osiris; 7. Isis and
Horus; 8. Athor.  Those of Thebes were   1. Amen Ra; 2. Mentu; 3.
Atum; 4. Shu and Tefnu; 5. Seb; 6. Osiris; 7. Set and Nepthys; 8.
Horus and Athor.  The gods of the second order were twelve in
number, but the name of one only, an Egyptian Hercules, has been
preserved.  The third order is stated to have comprised Osiris,
who, it will be seen, belonged to the first order."  GUIDE TO THE
FIRST AND SECOND EGYPTIAN ROOMS, BRITISH MUSEUM.   S. Birch

Miss Edwards gives the following convenient register of the names
most familiar among the Egyptian gods (in her very interesting
book, "A Thousand Miles up the Nile").

PHTAH or PTAH: In form a mummy, holding the emblem called by some
the Nilometer, by others the emblem of Stability, called "the
father of the Beginning, the Creator of the Egg of the Sun and
Moon," Chief Deity of Memphis.

KNEPH, KNOUM or KNOUPHIS: Ram-headed, called the Maker of gods
and men, the Soul of the gods.  Chief Deity of Elephantine and
the Cataracts.

RA: Hawk-headed, and crowned with the sun-disc, encircled by an
asp.  The divine disposer and organizer of the world; adored
throughout Egypt.

AMEN RA: Of human form, crowned with a flat-topped cap and two
long, straight plumes; clothed in the schenti; his flesh
sometimes painted blue.  There are various forms of this god
(there were almost as many varieties of Ammon in Egypt as there
are varieties of the Madonna in Italy or Spain), but he is most
generally described as King of the Gods, chief deity of Thebes.

KHEM: Of human form, mummified; wears head-dress of Amen Ra; his
right hand uplifted, holding a flail.  The god of productiveness
and generation.  Chief deity of Khemmis, or Ekhmeem.

OSIRIS: Of human form, mummified, crowned with a mitre, and
holding the flail and crook.  Called the Good; the Lord above
all; the one lord.  Was the god of the lower world; judge of the
dead; and representative of the sun below the horizon.  Adored
through Egypt.  Local deity of Abydos.

NEFER ATUM: Human-headed, and crowned with the pschent.  This god
represented the nocturnal sun, or the sun lighting the lower
world.  Local deity of Heliopolis.

THOTH: In form a man, ibis-headed, generally depicted with the
pen and palette of a scribe.  Was the god of the moon, and of
letters.  Local deity of Sesoon, or Hermopolit.

SEB: The "Father of the Gods," and deity of terrestrial
vegetation.  In form like a man with a goose upon his head.

SET: Represented by a symbolic animal, with a muzzle and ears
like a jackal, the body of an ass, and an upright tail, like the
tail of a lion.  Was originally a warlike god, and became in
later times the symbol of evil and the enemy of Osiris.

KHONS: Hawk-headed, crowned with the sun-disc and horns.  Is
sometimes represented as a youth with the side-lock, standing on
a crocodile.

HORUS: Horus appears variously as Horus, Horus Aroeris, and Horus
Harpakhrat (Hippocrates), or Horus the child.  Is represented
under the first two forms as a man, hawk-headed, wearing the
double crown of Egypt; in the latter as a child with the side-
lock.  Local deity of Edfoo (Apollinopolis Magna).

MAUT: A woman draped, and crowned with the pschent (the pschent
was a double crown, worn by the king at his coronation),
representing a vulture.  Adored at Thebes.

NEITH: A woman draped, holding sometimes a bow and arrows,
crowned with the crown of Lower Egypt.  She presided over war,
and the loom.  Worshipped at Thebes.

ISIS: A woman crowned with the sun-disc surmounted by a throne,
and sometimes enclosed between horns.  Adored at Abydos.  Her
soul resided in Sothis on the Dog-star.

NUT: A woman so bent that her hands touched the earth.  She
represents the vault of heaven, and is the mother of the gods.

HATHOR: Cow-headed, and crowned with the disc and plumes.  Deity
of Amenti, or the Egyptian Hades.  Worshipped at Denderah.

PASHT: Pasht and Bast appear to be two forms of the same goddess.
As Bast she is represented as a woman, lion-headed, with the disc
and uroeus; as Pasht she is cat-headed, and holds a sistrum.
Adored at Bubastis.  Observe the syllable BAST.

The highest visible deity of the Egyptians was Amun Ra, or Amen
Ra, the concealed sun; the word Ra signifying the sun.  This name
appears in the Greek and Latin writers as Zeus Ammon and Jupiter
Ammon.  When Amun manifests himself by his word, will or spirit,
he is known as Nu, Num, Noub, Nef, Neph, or Kneph,   and this
word Kneph through the form Cnuphis is, perhaps, the Anubis of
the Greek and Latin authors. That word has not been found earlier
than the time of Augustus.  Anubis was then worshipped as the
guardian god, and represented with a dog's head.

The soul of Osiris was supposed to exist in some way in the
sacred bull Apis, of which Serapis or Sarapis is probably another
name.  "Apis," says Herodotus, "is a young bull,   whose hair is
black, on his forehead a white triangle, -- on his back an eagle,
  with a beetle under his tongue and with the hair of his tail
double."  Ovid says he is of various colors.  Plutarch says he
has a crescent on his right side.  These superstitions varied
from age to age.  Apis was worshipped in Memphis.

It must be observed, in general, that the names in the Latin
classics belong to a much later period of the Egyptian religion
than the names found on most of the monuments.  It will be found,
that, as in the change from Nu to Anubis, it is difficult to
trace the progress of a name from one to the other.  In the cases
where an ox, a ram, or a dog is worshipped with, or as a symbol
of, a god, we probably have the survival of a very early local
idolatry.

Horus or Harpocrates, named above, was the son of Osiris.  He is
sometimes represented, seated on a Lotus-flower, with his finger
on his lips, as the god of silence.

In one of Moore's Irish Melodies is an allusion to Harpocrates: -

"Thyself shall, under some rosy bower,
Sit mute, with thy finger on thy lip:
Like him, the boy, who born among
The flowers that on the Nile-stream blush,
Sits over thus,   his only song
To Earth and Heaven, "Hush, all, hush!"

MYTH OF OSIRIS AND ISIS

Osiris and Isis were at one time induced to descend to the earth
to bestow gifts and blessings on its inhabitants.  Isis showed
them first the use of wheat and barley, and Osiris made the
instruments of agriculture and taught men the use of them, as
well as how to harness the ox to the plough.  He then gave men
laws, the institution of marriage, a civil organization, and
taught them how to worship the gods.  After he had thus made the
valley of the Nile a happy country, he assembled a host with
which he went to bestow his blessings upon the rest of the world.
He conquered the nations everywhere, but not with weapons, only
with music and eloquence.  His brother Typhon (Typhon is supposed
to be the Seth of the monuments) saw this, and filled with envy
and malice sought, during his absence, to usurp his throne.   But
Isis, who held the reins of government, frustrated his plans.
Still more embittered, he now resolved to kill his brother.  This
he did in the following manner: Having organized a conspiracy of
seventy-two members, he went with them to the feast which was
celebrated in honor of the king's return.  He then caused a box
or chest to be brought in, which had been made to fit exactly the
size of Osiris, and declared that he would give that chest of
precious wood to whosoever could get into it.  The rest tried in
vain, but no sooner was Osiris in it than Typhon and his
companions closed the lid and flung the chest into the Nile.
When Isis heard of the cruel murder she wept and mourned, and
then with her hair shorn, clothed in black and beating her
breast, she sought diligently for the body of her husband.  In
this search she was assisted by Anubis, the son of Osiris and
Nephthys.  They sought in vain for some time; for when the chest,
carried by the waves to the shores of Byblos, had become
entangled in the reeds that grew at the edge of the water, the
divine power that dwelt in the body of Osiris imparted such
strength to the shrub that it grew into a mighty tree, enclosing
in its trunk the coffin of the god.  This tree, with its sacred
deposit, was shortly afterward felled, and erected as a column in
the palace of the king of Phoenicia.  But at length, by the aid
of Anubis and the sacred birds, Isis ascertained these facts, and
then went to the royal city.  There she offered herself at the
palace as a servant, and being admitted, threw off her disguise
and appeared as the goddess, surrounded with thunder and
lightning.  Striking the column with her wand, she caused it to
split open and give up the sacred coffin.  This she seized and
returned with it, and concealed it in the depth of a forest, but
Typhon discovered it, and cutting the body into fourteen pieces,
scattered them hither and thither.  After a tedious search, Isis
found thirteen pieces, the fishes of the Nile having eaten the
other.  This she replaced by an imitation of sycamore wood, and
buried the body at Philoe, which became ever after the great
burying place of the nation, and the spot to which pilgrimages
were made from all parts of the country.  A temple of surpassing
magnificence was also erected there in honor of the god, and at
every place where one of his limbs had been found, minor temples
and tombs were built to commemorate the event.  Osiris became
after that the tutelar deity of the Egyptians.  His soul was
supposed always to inhabit the body of the bull Apis, and at his
death to transfer itself to his successor.

Apis, the Bull of Memphis, was worshipped with the greatest
reverence by the Egyptians.  As soon as a bull marked with the
marks which have been described, was found by those sent in
search of him, he was placed in a building facing the east, and
was fed with milk for four months.  At the expiration of this
term the priests repaired at new moon with great pomp, to his
habitation, and saluted him Apis.  He was placed in a vessel
magnificently decorated and conveyed down the Nile to Memphis,
where a temple, with two chapels and a court for exercise, was
assigned to him.   Sacrifices were made to him, and once every
year, about the time when the Nile began to rise, a golden cup
was thrown into the river, and a grand festival was held to
celebrate his birthday.  The people believed that during this
festival the crocodiles forgot their natural ferocity and became
harmless.  There was however one drawback to his happy lot; he
was not permitted to live beyond a certain period; and if when he
had attained the age of twenty-five years, he still survived, the
priests drowned him in the sacred cistern, and then buried him in
the temple of Serapis.  On the death of this bull, whether it
occurred in the course of nature or by violence, the whole land
was filled with sorrow and lamentations, which lasted until his
successor was found.

A new Apis was found as late as the reign of Hadrian.  A mummy
made from one of the Sacred Bulls may be seen in the Egyptian
collection of the Historical Society, New York.

Milton, in his Hymn of the Nativity, alludes to the Egyptian
deities, not as imaginary beings, but as real demons put to
flight by the coming of Christ:

"The brutish gods of Nile as fast,
Isis and Horus and the dog Anubis haste.
Nor is Osiris seen
In Memphian grove or green
Trampling the unshowered* grass with lowings loud;
Nor can he be at rest
Within his sacred chest;
Nought but profoundest hell can be his shroud.
In vain with timbrel'd anthems dark
The sable-stoled sorcerers bear his worshipped ark."

*(There being no rain in Egypt, the grass is "unshowered," and
the country depends for its fertility upon the overflowings of
the Nile.  The ark alluded to in the last line is shown by
pictures still remaining on the walls of the Egyptian temples to
have been borne by the priests in their religious processions.
It probably represented the chest in which Osiris was placed.)

Isis was represented in statuary with the head veiled, a symbol
of mystery.  It is this which Tennyson alludes to in Maud, 0V.8

"For the drift of te Maker is dark, an Isis hid by the veil."

ORACLES

Oracle was the name used to denote the place where answers were
supposed to be given by any of the divinities to those who
consulted them respecting the future. The word was also used to
signify the response which was given.

The most ancient Grecian oracle was that of Jupiter at Dodona.
According to one account it was established in the following
manner.  Two black doves took their flight from Thebes in Egypt.
One flew to Dodona in Epirus and alighting in a grove of oaks, it
proclaimed in human language to the inhabitants of the district
that they must establish there an oracle of Jupiter.  The other
dove flew to the temple of Jupiter Ammon in the Libyan oasis, and
delivered a similar command there.   Another account is, that
they were not doves, but priestesses, who were carried off from
Thebes in Egypt by the Phoenicians, and set up oracles at Oasis
and Dodona.  The responses of the oracle were given from the
trees, by the branches rustling in the wind, the sounds being
interpreted by the priests.

But the most celebrated of the Grecian oracles was that of Apollo
at Delphi, a city built on the slopes of Parnassus in Phocis.

It had been observed at a very early period that the goats
feeding on Parnassus were thrown into convulsions when they
approached a certain long deep cleft in the side of the mountain.
This was owing to a peculiar vapor arising out of the cavern, and
one of the goatherds was induced to try its effects upon himself.
Inhaling the intoxicating air he was affected in the same manner
as the cattle had been, and the inhabitants of the surrounding
country, unable to explain the circumstance, imputed the
convulsive ravings to which he gave utterance while under the
power of the exhalations, to a divine inspiration.  The fact was
speedily circulated widely, and a temple was erected on the spot.
The prophetic influence was at first variously attributed to the
goddess Earth, to Neptune, Themis, and others, but it was at
length assigned to Apollo, and to him alone.  A priestess was
appointed whose office it was to inhale the hallowed air, and who
was named the Pythia.  She was prepared for this duty by previous
ablution at the fountain of Castalia, and being crowned with
laurel was seated upon a tripod similarly adorned, which was
placed over the chasm whence the divine afflatus proceeded.  Her
inspired words while thus situated were interpreted by the
priests.

ORACLE OF TROPHONIUS

Besides the oracles of Jupiter and Apollo, at Dodona and Delphi,
that of Trophonius in Boeotia was held in high estimation.
Trophonius and Agamedes were brothers.  They were distinguished
architechts, and built the temple of Apollo at Delphi, and a
treasury for King Hyrieus.  In the wall of the treasury they
placed a stone, in such a manner that it could be taken out; and
by this means from time to time purloined the treasure.  This
amazed Hyrieus, for his locks and seals were untouched, and yet
his wealth, continually diminished.   At length he set a trap for
the thief and Agamedes was caught.  Trophonius unable to
extricate him, and fearing that when found he would be compelled
by torture to discover his accomplice, cut off his head.
Trophonius himself is said to have been shortly afterwards
swallowed up by the earth.

The oracle of Trophonius was at Lebadea in Boeotia.  During a
great drought the Boeotians, it is said, were directed by the god
at Delphi to seek aid of Trophonius at Lebadea.  They came
thither, but could find no oracle.  One of them, however,
happening to see a swarm of bees, followed them to a chasm in the
earth, which proved to be the place sought.

Peculiar ceremonies were to be performed by the person who came
to consult the oracle.  After these preliminaries, he descended
into the cave by a narrow passage.  This place could be entered
only in the night.  The person returned from the cave by the same
narrow passage, but walking backwards.  He appeared melancholy
and dejected; and hence the proverb which was applied to a person
low-spirited and gloomy, "He has been consulting the oracle of
Trophonius."

ORACLE OF AESCULAPIUS

There were numerous oracles of Aesculapius, but the most
celebrated one was at Epidaurus.  Here the sick sought responses
and the recovry of their health by sleeping in the temple.  It
has been inferred from the accounts that have come down to us,
that the treatment of the sick resembled what is now called
Animal Magnetism or Mesmerism.

Serpents were sacred to Aesculapius, probably because of a
superstition that those animals have a faculty of renewing their
youth by a change of skin.  The worship of Aesculapius was
introduced into Rome in a time of great sickness, and an embassy
sent to the temple of Epidaurus to entreat the aid of the god.
Aesculapius was propitious, and on the return of the ship
accompanied it in the form of a serpent.  Arriving in the river
Tiber, the serpent glided from the vessel and took possession of
an island in the river, and a temple was there erected to his
honor.

ORACLE OF APIS

At Memphis the sacred bull Apis gave answer to those who
consulted him, by the manner in which he received or rejected
what was presented to him.  If the bull refused food from the
hand of the inquirer it was considered an unfavorable sign, and
the contrary when he received it.

It has been a question whether oracular responses ought to be
ascribed to mere human contrivance or to the agency of evil
spirits.  The latter opinion has been most general in past ages.
A third theory has been advanced since the phenomena of Mesmerism
have attracted attention, that something like the mesmeric trance
was induced in the Pythoness, and the faculty of clairvoyance
really called into action.

Another question is as to the time when the Pagan oracles ceased
to give responses.   Ancient Christian writers assert that they
became silent at the birth of Christ, and were heard no more
after that date.  Milton adopts this view in his Hymn of the
Nativity, and in lines of solemn and elevated beauty pictures the
consternation of the heathen idols at the advent of the Saviour.

"The oracles are dumb;
No voice or hideous hum
Rings through the arched roof in words deceiving.
Apollo from his shrine
Can no more divine,
With hollow shriek the steep of Delphos leaving.
No nightly trance or breathed spell
Inspires the pale-eyed priest from the prophetic cell."

In Cowper's poem of Yardley Oak there are some beautiful
mythological allusions.  The former of the two following is to
the fable of Castor and Pollux; the latter is more appropriate to
our present subject.  Addressing the acorn he says,

"Thou fell'st mature; and in the loamy clod,
Swelling with vegetative force instinct,
Didst burst thine egg, as theirs the fabled Twins
Now stars; two lobes protruding, paired exact;
A leaf succeeded and another leaf,
And, all the elements thy puny growth
Fostering propitious, thou becam'st a twig.
Who lived when thou was such?  Oh, couldst thou speak
As in Dodona once thy kindred trees
Oracular, I would not curious ask
The future, best unknown, but at thy mouth
Inquisitive, the less ambiguous past."

Tennyson in his Talking Oak alludes to the oaks of Dodona in
these lines:


"And I will work in prose and rhyme,
And praise thee more in both
Than bard has honored beech or lime,
Or that Thessalian growth
In which the swarthy ring-dove sat
And mystic sentence spoke."

Byron alludes to the oracle of Delphi where, speaking of
Rousseau, whose writings he conceives did much to bring on the
French revolution, he says,

"For then he was inspired, and from him came,
As from the Pythian's mystic cave of yore,
Those oracles which set the world in flame,
Nor ceased to burn till kingdoms were no more."


Chapter XXVIII
Origin of Mythology   Statues of Gods and Goddesses   Poets of
Mythology

Having reached the close of our series of stories of Pagan
mythology, an inquiry suggests itself.  "Whence came these
stories?  Have they a foundation in truth, or are they simply
dreams of the imagination?"  Philosophers have suggested various
theories on the subject of which we shall give three or four.

1.  The Scriptural theory; according to which all mythological
legends are derived from the narratives of Scripture, though the
real facts have been disguised and altered.  Thus Deucalion is
only another name for Noah, Hercules for Samson, Arion for Jonah,
etc.  Sir Walter Raleigh, in his History of the World, says,
"Jubal, Tubal, and Tubal-Cain were Mercury, Vulcan, and Apollo,
inventors of Pasturage, Smithing, and Music.  The Dragon which
kept the golden apples was the serpent that beguiled Eve.
Nimrod's tower was the attempt of the Giants against Heaven.
There are doubtless many curious coincidences like these, but the
theory cannot without extravagance be pushed so far as to account
for any great proportion of the stories.

2.  The Historical theory; according to which all the persons
mentioned in mythology were once real human beings, and the
legends and fabulous traditions relating to them are merely the
additions and embellishments of later times.  Thus the story of
AEolus, the king and god of the winds, is supposed to have risen
from the fact that AEolus was the ruler of some islands in the
Tyrrhenian Sea, where he reigned as a just and pious king, and
taught the natives the use of sails for ships, and how to tell
from the signs of the atmosphere the changes of the weather and
the winds.  Cadmus, who, the legend says, sowed the earth with
dragon's teeth, from which sprang a crop of armed men, was in
fact an emigrant from Phoenicia, and brought with him into Greece
the knowledge of the letters of the alphabet, which he taught to
the natives.  From these rudiments of learning sprung
civilization, which the poets have always been prone to describe
as a deterioration of man's first estate, the Golden Age of
innocence and simplicity.

3.  The Allegorical theory supposes that all the myths of the
ancients were allegorical and symbolical, and contained some
moral, religious, or philosophical truth or historical fact,
under the form of an allegory, but came in process of time to be
understood literally.  Thus Saturn, who devours his own children,
is the same power whom the Greeks called Kronos (Time), which may
truly be said to destroy whatever it has brought into existence.
The story of Io is interpreted in a similar manner.  Io is the
moon, and Argus the starry sky, which, as it were, keeps
sleepless watch over her.  The fabulous wanderings of Io
represent the continual revolutions of the moon, which also
suggested to Milton the same idea.

"To behold the wandering moon
Riding near her highest noon,
Like one that had been led astray
In the heaven's wide, pathless way."
Il Penseroso

4.  The Astronomical theory supposes that the different stories
are corrupted versions of astronomical statements, of which the
true meaning was forgotten.  This theory is pushed to its extreme
by Dupuis, in his treatise "Sur tous les cultes."

5.  The Physical theory, according to which the elements of air,
fire, and water, were originally the objects of religious
adoration, and the principal deities were personifications of the
powers of nature.  The transition was easy from a personification
of the elements to the notion of supernatural beings presiding
over and governing the different objects of nature.  The Greeks,
whose imagination was lively, peopled all nature with invisible
beings, and supposed that every object, from the sun and sea to
the smallest fountain and rivulet, was under the care of some
particular divinity.  Wordsworth, in his Excursion, has
beautifully developed this view of Grecian mythology.

"In that fair clime the lonely herdsman, stretched
On the soft grass through half a summer's day,
With music lulled his indolent repose;
And, in some fit of weariness, if he,
When his own breath was silent, chanced to hear
A distant strain far sweeter than the sounds
Which his poor skill could make, his fancy fetched
Even from the blazing chariot of the sun
A beardless youth who touched a golden lute,
And filled the illumined groves with ravishment.
The mighty hunter, lifting up his eyes
Toward the crescent Moon, with grateful heart
Called on the lovely Wanderer who bestowed
That timely light to share his joyous sport;
And hence a beaming goddess with her nymphs
Across the lawn and through the darksome grove
(Not unaccompanied with tuneful notes
By echo multiplied from rock or cave)
Swept in the storm of chase, as moon and stars
Glance rapidly along the clouded heaven
When winds are blowing strong.  The traveller slaked
His thirst from rill or gushing fount, and thanked
The Naiad.  Sunbeams upon distant hills
Gliding apace with shadows in their train,
Might with small help from fancy, be transformed
Into fleet Oreads sporting visibly.
The Zephyrs, fanning, as they passed, their wings,
Lacked not for love fair objects whom they wooed
With gentle whisper.  Withered boughs grotesque,
Stripped of their leaves and twigs by hoary age,
>From depth of shaggy covert peeping forth
In the low vale, or on steep mountain side;
And sometimes intermixed with stirring horns
Of the live deer, or goat's depending beard;
These were the lurking Satyrs, a wild brood
Of gamesome deities; or Pan himself,
The simple shepherd's awe-inspiring god."

All the theories which have bene mentioned are true to a certain
extent.  It would therefore be more correct to say that the
mythology of a nation has sprung from all these sources combined
than from any one in particular.  We may add also that there are
many myths which have risen from the desire of man to account for
those natural phenomena which he cannot understand; and not a few
have had their rise from a similar desire of giving a reason for
the names of places and persons.

STATUES OF THE GODS

Adequately to represent to the eye the ideas intended to be
conveyed to the mind under the several names of deities, was a
task which called into exercise the highest powers of genius and
art.  Of the many attempts FOUR have been most celebrated, the
first two known to us only by the descriptions of the ancients,
and by copies on gems, which are still preserved; the other two
still extant and the acknowledged masterpieces of the sculptor's
art.

THE OLYMPIAN JUPITER

The statue of the Olympian Jupiter by Phidias was considered the
highest achievement of this department of Grecian art.  It was of
colossal dimensions, and was what the ancients called
"chryselephantine;" that is, composed of ivory and gold; the
parts representing flesh being of ivory laid on a core of wood or
stone, while the drapery and other ornaments were of gold.  The
height of the figure was forty feet, on a pedestal twelve feet
high.  The god was represented seated on this throne.  His brows
were crowned with a wreath of olive, and he held in his right
hand a sceptre, and in his left a statue of Victory.  The throne
was of cedar, adorned with gold and precious stones.

The idea which the artist essayed to embody was that of the
supreme deity of the Hellenic (Grecian) nation, enthroned as a
conqueror, in perfect majesty and repose, and ruling with a nod
the subject world.  Phidias avowed that he took his idea from the
representation which Homer gives in the first book of the Iliad,
in the passage thus translated by Pope:

"He spoke and awful bends his sable brows,
Shakes his ambrosial curls and gives the nod,
The stamp of fate and sanction of the god.
High heaven with reverence the dread signal took,
And all Olympus to the centre shook."

(Cowper's version is less elegant, but truer to the original.

"He ceased, and under his dark brows the nod
Vouchsafed of confirmation.  All around
The sovereign's everlasting head his curls
Ambrosial shook, and the huge mountain reeled."

It may interest our readers to see how this passage appears in
another famous version, that which was issued under the name of
Tickell, contemporaneously with Pope's, and which, being by many
attributed to Addison, led to the quarrel which ensued between
Addison and Pope.

"This said, his kingly brow the sire inclined;
The large black curls fell awful from behind,
Thick shadowing the stern forehead of the god;
Olympus trembled at the almighty nod.")

THE MINERVA OF THE PARTHENON

This was also the work of Phidias.  It stood in the Parthenon, or
temple of Minera at Athens.  The goddess was represented
standing.  In one hand she held a spear, in the other a statue of
Victory.  Her helmet, highly decorated, was surmounted by a
Sphinx.  The statue was forty feet in height, and, like the
Jupiter, composed of ivory and gold.  The eyes were of marble,
and probably painted to represent the iris and pupil.  The
Parthenon in which this statue stood was also constructed under
the direction and superintendence of Phidias.  Its exterior was
enriched with sculptures, many of them from the hand of Phidias.
The Elgin marbles now in the British Museum are a part of them.

Both the Jupiter and Minerva of Phidias are lost, but there is
good ground to believe that we have, in several extant statues
and busts, the artist's conceptions of the countenances of both.
They are characterized by grave and dignified beauty, and freedom
from any transient expression, which in the language of art is
called REPOSE.

THE VENUS DE' MEDICI

The Venus of the Medici is so called from its having been in the
possession of the princes of that name in Rome when it first
attracted attention, about two hundred years ago.  An inscription
on the base records it to be the work of Cleomenes, an Athenian
sculptor of 200 B.C., but the authenticity of the inscription is
doubtful.  There is a story that the artist was employed by
public authority to make a statue exhibiting the perfection of
female beauty, and to aid him in his task, the most perfect forms
the city could supply were furnished him for models.  It is this
which Thomson alludes to in his Summer.

"So stands the statue that enchants the world;
So bending tries to veil the matchless boast,
The mingled beauties of exulting Greece."

Byron also alludes to this statue.  Speaking of the Florence
Museum, he says:

"There too the goddess loves in stone, and fills
The air around with beauty;"

And in the next stanza,

"Blood, pulse, and breast confirm the Dardan shepherd's prize."

This last allusion is explained in Chapter XX.

THE APOLLO BELVEDERE

The most highly esteemed of all the remains of ancient sculpture
is the statue of Apollo, called the Belvedere, from the name of
the apartment of the Pope's palace at Rome, in which it is
placed.  The artist is unknown.  It is supposed to be a work of
Roman art, of about the first century of our era.  It is a
standing figure, in marble, more than seven feet high, naked
except for the cloak which is fastened around the neck and hangs
over the extended left arm.  It is supposed to represent the god
in the moment when he has shot the arrow to destroy the monster
Python (See Chapter II).  The victorious divinity is in the act
of stepping forward.  The left arm which seems to have held the
bow is outstretched, and the head is turned in the same
direction.  In attitude and proportion the graceful majesty of
the figure is unsurpassed.  The effect is completed by the
countenance, where, on the perfection of youthful godlike beauty
there dwells the consciousness of triumphant power.

THE DIANA A LA BICHE

The Diana of the hind, in the palace of the Louvre, may be
considered the counterpart to the Apollo Belvedere.  The attitude
much resembles that of the Apollo, the sizes correspond and also
the style of execution.  It is a work of the highest order,
though by no means equal to the Apollo.  The attitude is that of
hurried and eager motion, the face that of a huntress in the
excitement of the chase.  The left hand is extended over the
forehead of the Hind which runs by her side, the right arm
reaches backward over the shoulder to draw an arrow from the
quiver.

THE VENUS OF MELOS

Of the Venus of Melos, perhaps the most famous of our statues of
mythology, very little is known.  There are many indeed who
believe that it is not a statue of Venus at all.

It was found in the year 1820 in the Island of Melos by a
peasant, who sold it to the French consul at the place.  The
statue was standing in the theatre, which had been filled up with
rubbish in the course of centuries, and when discovered was
broken in several places, and some of the pieces were gone.
These missing pieces, notably the two arms, have been restored in
various ways by modern artists.  As has been said above, there is
a controversy as to whether the statue represents Venus or some
other goddess.  Much has been written on each side, but the
question still remains unsettled.  The general opinion of those
who contend that it is not Venus is that it is a statue or Nike
or Victory.

THE POETS OF MYTHOLOGY

Homer, from whose poems of the Iliad and Odyssey we have taken
the chief part of our chapters of the Trojan war and the return
of the Grecians, is almost as mythical a personage as the heroes
he celebrates.  The traditionary story is that he was a wandering
minstrel, blind and old, who travelled from place to place
singing his lays to the music of his harp, in the courts of
princes or the cottages of peasants, and dependent upon the
voluntary offerings of his hearers for support.  Byron calls him
"The blind old man of Scio's rocky isle," and a well-known
epigram, alluding to the uncertainty of the fact of his
birthplace, says,


"Seven wealthy towns contend for Homer dead,
Through which the living Homer begged his bread."

An older version is,

"Seven cities warred for Homer being dead,
Who living had no roof to shroud his head."

These lines are by Thomas Heywood; the others are ascribed to
Thomas Seward.

These seven cities were Smyrna, Scio, Rhodes, Colophon, Salamis,
Argos, and Athens.

Modern scholars have doubted whether the Homeric poems are the
work of any single mind.  This arises from the difficulty of
believing that poems of such length could have been committed to
writing at so early an age as that usually assigned to these, an
age earlier than the date of any remaining inscriptions or coins,
and when no materials, capable of containing such long
productions were yet introduced into use.  On the other hand it
is asked how poems of such length could have been handed down
from age to age by means of the memory alone.  This is answered
by the statement that there was a professional body of men,
called Rhapsodists, who recited the poems of others, and whose
business it was to commit to memory and rehearse for pay the
national and patriotic legends.

The prevailing opinion of the learned, at this time, seems to be
that the framework and much of the structure of the poems belong
to Homer, but that there are numerous interpolations and
additions by other hands.

The date assigned to Homer, on the authority of Herodotus, is 850
B.C., but a range of two or three centuries must be given for the
various conjectures of critics.

VIRGIL

Virgil, called also by his surname, Maro, from whose poem of the
AEneid we have taken the story of AEneas, was one of the great
poets who made the reign of the Roman emperor, Augustus, so
celebrated, under the name of the Augustan age.  Virgil was born
in Mantua in the year 70 B.C.  His great poem is ranked next to
those of Homer, in the highest class of poetical composition, the
Epic.  Virgil is far inferior to Homer in originality and
invention, but superior to him in correctness and elegance.  To
critics of English lineage Milton alone of modern poets seems
worthy to be classed with these illustrious ancients.  His poem
of Paradise Lost, from which we have borrowed so many
illustrations, is in many respects equal, in some superior, to
either of the great works of antiquity.  The following epigram of
Dryden characterizes the three poets with as much truth as it is
usual to find in such pointed criticism:

ON MILTON

"Three poets in three different ages born.
Greece, Italy, and England did adorn.
The first in loftiness of soul surpassed,
The next in majesty, in both the last.
The force of nature could no further go;
To make a third she joined the other two."

>From Cowper's Table Talk:

"Ages elapsed ere Homer's lamp appeared,
And ages ere the Mantuan swan was heard.
To carry nature lengths unknown before,
To give a Milton birth, asked ages more.
Thus genius rose and set at ordered times,
And shot a dayspring into distant climes,
Ennobling every region that he chose;
He sunk in Greece, in Italy he rose,
And, tedious years of Gothic darkness past,
Emerged all splendor in our isle at last.
Thus lovely halcyons dive into the main,
Then show far off their shining plumes again."

OVID

Often alluded to in poetry by his other name of Naso, was born in
the year 43 B.C.  He was educated for public life and held some
offices of considerable dignity, but poetry was his delight, and
he early resolved to devote himself to it.  He accordingly sought
the society of the contemporary poets, and was acquainted with
Horace and saw Virgil, though the latter died when Ovid was yet
too young and undistinguished to have formed his acquaintance.
Ovid spent an easy life at Rome in the enjoyment of a competent
income.  He was intimate with the family of Augustus, the
emperor, and it is supposed that some serious offence given to
some member of that family was the cause of an event which
reversed the poet's happy circumstances and clouded all the
latter portion of his life.  At the age of fifty he was banished
from Rome, and ordered to betake himself to Tomi, on the borders
of the Black Sea.  Here, among the barbarous people and in a
severe climate, the poet, who had been accustomed to all the
pleasures of a luxurious capital and the society of his most
distinguished contemporaries, spent the last ten years of his
life, worn out with grief and anxiety.  His only consolation in
exile was to address his wife and absent friends, and his letters
were all poetical.  Though these poems (The Tristia and Letters
from Pontus) have no other topic than the poet's sorrows, his
exquisite taste and fruitful invention have redeemed them from
the charge of being tedious, and they are read with pleasure and
even with sympathy.

The two great works of Ovid are his Metamorphoses and his Fasti.
They are both mythological poems, and from the former we have
taken most of our stories of Grecian and Roman mythology.  A late
writer thus characterizes these poems:

     "The rich mythology of Greece furnished Ovid, as it may
still furnish the poet, the painter, and the sculptor, with
materials for his art.  With exquisite taste, simplicity, and
pathos he has narrated the fabulous traditions of early ages, and
given to them that appearance of reality which only a master-hand
could impart.  His pictures of nature are striking and true; he
selects with care that which is appropriate; he rejects the
superfluous; and when he has completed his work, it is neither
defective nor redundant.  The Metamorphoses are read with
pleasure by youth, and are re-read in more advanced age with
still greater delight.  The poet ventured to predict that his
poem would survive him, and be read wherever the Roman name was
known."

The prediction above alluded to is contained in the closing lines
of the Metamorphoses, of which we give a literal translation
below:

"And now I close my work, which not the ire
Of Jove, nor tooth of time, nor sword, nor fire
Shall bring to nought.  Come when it will that day
Which o'er the body, not the mind, has sway,
And snatch the remnant of my life away,
My better part above the stars shall soar,
And my renown endure for evermore.
Where'er the Roman arms and arts shall spread,
There by the people shall my book be read;
And, if aught true in poet's visions be,
My name and fame have immortality."


Chapter XXIX
Modern Monsters:   The Phoenix   Basilisk   Unicorn   Salamander

There is a set of imaginary beings which seem to have been the
successors of the "Gorgons, Hydras, and Chimeras dire" of the old
superstitions, and, having no connection with the false gods of
Paganism, to have continued to enjoy an existence in the popular
belief after Paganism was superseded by Christianity.  They are
mentioned perhaps by the classical writers, but their chief
popularity and currency seem to have been in more modern times.
We seek our accounts of them not so much in the poetry of the
ancients, as in the old natural history books and narrations of
travellers.  The accounts which we are about to give are taken
chiefly from the Penny Cyclopedia.

THE PHOENIX

Ovid tells the story of the Phoenix as follows: "Most beings
spring from other individuals; but there is a certain kind which
reproduces itself.  The Assyrians call it the Phoenix.  It does
not live on fruit or flowers, but on frankincense and odoriferous
gums.  When it has lived five hundred years, it builds itself a
nest in the branches of an oak, or on the top of a palm-tree.  In
this it collects cinnamon, and spikenard, and myrrh, and of these
materials builds a pile on which it deposits itself, and dying,
breathes out its last breath amidst odors.  From the body of the
parent bird a young Phoenix issues forth, destined to live as
long a life as its predecessor.   When this has grown up and
gained sufficient strength, it lifts its nest from the tree (its
own cradle and its parent's sepulchre) and carries it to the city
of Heliopolis in Egypt, and deposits it in the temple of the
Sun."

Such is the account given by a poet.  Now let us see that of a
philosophic historian.  Tacitus says, "In the consulship of
Paulus Fabius (A.D. 34), the miraculous bird known to the world
by the name of Phoenix, after disappearing for a series of ages,
revisited Egypt.  It was attended in its flight by a group of
various birds, all attracted by the novelty, and gazing with
wonder at so beautiful an appearance."  He then gives an account
of the bird, not varying materially from the preceding, but
adding some details.  "The first care of the young bird as soon
as fledged and able to trust to his wings is to perform the
obsequies of his father.  But this duty is not undertaken rashly.
He collects a quantity of myrrh, and to try his strength makes
frequent excursions with a load on his back.  When he has gained
sufficient confidence in his own vigor, he takes up the body of
his father and flies with it to the altar of the Sun, where he
leaves it to be consumed in flames of fragrance."  Other writers
add a few particulars.  The myrrh is compacted in the form of an
egg, in which the dead Phoenix is enclosed.  From the mouldering
flesh of the dead bird a worm springs, and this worm, when grown
large, is transformed into a bird.  Herodotus DESCRIBES the bird,
though he says, "I have not seen it myself, except in a picture.
Part of his plumage is gold-colored, and part crimson; and he is
for the most part very much like an eagle in outline and bulk."

The first writer who disclaimed a belief in the existence of the
Phoenix was Sir Thomas Browne, in his Vulgar Errors, published in
1646.  He was replied to a few years later by Alexander Ross, who
says, in answer to the objection of the Phoenix so seldom making
his appearance, "His instinct teaches him to keep out of the way
of the tyrant of the creation, MAN, for if he were to be got at
some wealthy glutton would surely devour him, though there were
no more in the world."

Dryden, in one of his early poems, has this allusion to the
Phoenix:

"So when the new-born Phoenix first is seen,
Her feathered subjects all adore their queen,
And while she makes her progress through the East,
>From every grove her numerous train's increased;
Each poet of the air her glory sings,
And round him the pleased audience clap their wings."

Milton, in Paradise lost, Book V, compares the angel Raphael
descending to earth to a Phoenix:

"Down thither, prone in flight
He speeds, and through the vast ethereal sky
Sails between worlds and worlds, with steady wing,
Now on the polar winds, then with quick fan
Winnows the buxom air; till within soar
Of towering eagles, to all the fowls he seems
A Phoenix, gazed by all; as that sole bird
When, to enshrine his relics in the Sun's
Bright temple, to Egyptian Thebes he flies."

 THE COCKATRICE, OR BASILISK

This animal was called the king of the serpents.  In confirmation
of his royalty, he was said to be endowed with a crest or comb
upon the head, constituting a crown.  He was supposed to be
produced from the egg of a cock hatched under toads or serpents.
There were several species of this animal.  One species burned up
whatever they approached; a second were a kind of wandering
Medusa's heads, and their look caused an instant horror, which
was immediately followed by death.  In Shakespeare's play of
Richard the Third, Lady Anne, in answer to Richard's compliment
on her eyes, says, "Would they were basilisk's, to strike thee
dead!"

The basilisks were called kings of serpents because all other
serpents and snakes, behaving like good subjects, and wisely not
wishing to be burned up or struck dead, fled the moment they
heard the distant hiss of their king, although they might be in
full feed upon the most delicious prey, leaving the sole
enjoyment of the banquet to the royal monster.

The Roman naturalist Pliny thus describes him: "He does not impel
his body like other serpents, by a multiplied flexion, but
advances lofty and upright.  He kills the shrubs, not only by
contact but by breathing on them, and splits the rocks, such
power of evil is there in him. It was formally believed that if
killed by a spear from on horseback the power of the poison
conducted through the weapon killed not only the rider but the
horse also.  To this Lucan alludes in these lines:

"What though the Moor the basilisk hath slain,
And pinned him lifeless to the sandy plain,
Up through the spear the subtle venom flies,
The hand imbibes it, and the victor dies."

Such a prodigy was not likely to be passed over in the legends of
the saints.  Accordingly we find it recorded that a certain holy
man going to a fountain in the desert suddenly beheld a basilisk.
He immediately raised his eyes to heaven, and with a pious appeal
to the Deity, laid the monster dead at his feet.

These wonderful powers of the basilisk are attested by a host of
learned persons, such as Galen, Avicenna, Scaliger, and others.
Occasionally one would demur to some part of the tale while he
admitted the rest.  Jonston, a learned physician, sagely remarks,
"I would scarcely believe that it kills with its look, for who
could have seen it and lived to tell the story?"  The worthy sage
was not aware that those who went to hunt the basilisk of this
sort, took with them a mirror, which reflected back the deadly
glare upon its author, and by a kind of poetical justice slew the
basilisk with his own weapon.

But what was to attack this terrible and unapproachable monster?
There is an old saying that "everything has its enemy," and the
cockatrice quailed before the weasel.  The basilisk might look
daggers, the weasel cared not, but advanced boldly to the
conflict.  When bitten, the weasel retired for a moment to eat
some rue, which was the only plant the basilisks could not
wither, returned with renewed strength and soundness to the
charge, and never left the enemy till he was stretched dead on
the plain.  The monster, too, as if conscious of the irregular
way in which he came into the world, was supposed to have a great
antipathy to a cock; and well he might, for as soon as he heard
the cock crow he expired.

The basilisk was of some use after death.  Thus we read that its
carcass was suspended in the temple of Apollo, and in private
houses, as a sovereign remedy against spiders, and that it was
also hung up in the temple of Diana, for which reason no swallow
ever dared enter the sacred place.

The reader will, we apprehend, by this time have had enough of
absurdities, but still he may be interested to know that these
details come from the work of one who was considered in his time
an able and valuable writer on Natural History.  Ulysses
Aldrovandus was a celebrated naturalist of the sixteenth century,
and his work on natural history, in thirteen folio volumes,
contains with much that is valuable a large proportion of fables
and inutilities.  In particular he is so ample on the subject of
the cock and the bull, that from his practice all rambling,
gossiping tales of doubtful credibility are called COCK AND BULL
STORIES.  Still he is to be remembered with respect as the
founder of a botanic garden, and one of the leaders in the modern
habit of making scientific collections for research and inquiry.

Shelley, in his Ode to Naples, full of the enthusiasm excited by
the intelligence of the proclamation of a Constitutional
Government at Naples, in 1820, thus uses an allusion to the
basilisk:

"What though Cimmerian anarchs dare blaspheme
Freedom and thee?  A new Actaeon's error
Shall theirs have been,   devoured by their own bounds!
Be thou like the imperial basilisk,
Killing thy foe with unapparent wounds!
Gaze on oppression, till at that dread risk,
Aghast she pass from the earth's disk.
Fear not, but gaze,   for freemen mightier grow,
And slaves more feeble, gazing on their foe."

THE UNICORN

Pliny, the Roman naturalist, out of whose account of the unicorn
most of the modern unicorns have been described and figured,
records it as "a very ferocious beast, similar in the rest of its
body to a horse, with the head of a deer, the feet of an
elephant, the tail of a boar, a deep bellowing voice, and a
single black horn, two cubits in length, standing out in the
middle of its forehead."  He adds that "it cannot be taken
alive;" and some such excuse may have been necessary in those
days for not producing the living animal upon the arena of the
amphitheatre.

The unicorn seems to have been a sad puzzle to the hunters, who
hardly knew how to come at so valuable a piece of game.  Some
described the horn as moveable at the will of the animal, a kind
of small sword in short, with which ho hunter who was not
exceedingly cunning in fence could have a chance.  Others
maintained that all the animal's strength lay in its horn, and
that when hard pressed in pursuit, it would throw itself from the
pinnacle of the highest rocks horn foremost, so as to pitch upon
it, and then quietly march off not a whit the worse for its fall.

But it seems they found out how to circumvent the poor unicorn at
last.  They discovered that it was a great lover of purity and
innocence, so they took the field with a young VIRGIN, who was
placed in the unsuspecting admirer's way.  When the unicorn spied
her, he approached with all reverence, couched beside her, and
laying his head in her lap, fell asleep.  The treacherous virgin
then gave a signal, and the hunters made in and captured the
simple beast.

Modern zoologists, disgusted as they well may be with such fables
as these, disbelieve generally the existence of the unicorn.  Yet
there are animals bearing on their heads a bony protuberance more
or less like a horn, which may have given rise to the story.  The
rhinoceros horn, as it is called, is such a protuberance, though
it does not exceed a few inches in height, and is far from
agreeing with the descriptions of the horn of the unicorn.  The
nearest approach to a horn in the middle of the forehead is
exhibited in the bony protuberance on the forehead of the
giraffe; but this also is short and blunt, and is not the only
horn of the animal, but a third horn standing in front of the two
others.  In fine, though it would be presumptuous to deny the
existence of a one-horned quadruped other than the rhinoceros, it
may be safely stated that the insertion of a long and solid horn
in the living forehead of a horse-like or deer-like animal, is as
near an impossibility as any thing can be.

THE SALAMANDER

The following is from the Life of Benvenuto Cellini, an Italian
artist of the sixteenth century, written by himself, "When I was
about five years of age, my father happening to be in a little
room in which they had been washing, and where there was a good
fire of oak burning, looked into the flames and saw a little
animal resembling a lizard, which could live in the hottest part
of that element.  Instantly perceiving what it was he called for
my sister and me, and after he had shown us the creature, he gave
me a box on the ear.  I fell a crying, while he, soothing me with
caresses, spoke these words: 'My dear child, I do not give you
that blow for any fault you have committed, but that you may
recollect that the little creature you see in the fire is a
salamander; such a one as never was beheld before to my
knowledge.'  So saying he embraced me, and gave me some money."

It seems unreasonable to doubt a story of which signor Cellini
was both an eye and ear witness.  Add to which the authority of
numerous sage philosophers, at the head of whom are Aristotle and
Pliny, affirms this power of the salamander.  According to them,
the animal not only resists fire, but extinguishes it, and when
he sees the flame, charges it as an enemy which he well knows how
to vanquish.

That the skin of an animal which could resist the action of fire
should be considered proof against that element, is not to be
wondered at.  We accordingly find that a cloth made of the skins
of salamanders (for there really is such an animal, a kind of
lizard) was incombustible, and very valuable for wrapping up such
articles as were too precious to be intrusted to any other
envelopes.  These fire-proof cloths were actually produced, said
to be made of salamander's wool, though the knowing ones detected
that the substance of which they were composed was Asbestos, a
mineral, which is in fine filaments capable of being woven into a
flexible cloth.

The foundation of the above fables is supposed to be the fact
that the salamander really does secrete from the pores of his
body a milky juice, which, when he is irritated, is produced in
considerable quantity, and would doubtless, for a few moments,
defend the body from fire.  Then it is a hibernating animal, and
in winter retires to some hollow tree or other cavity, where it
coils itself up and remains in a torpid state till the spring
again calls it forth.  It may therefore sometimes be carried with
the fuel to the fire, and wake up only time enough to put forth
all its faculties for its defence.  Its viscous juice would do
good service, and all who profess to have seen it acknowledge
that it got out of the fire as fast as its legs could carry it;
indeed too fast for them ever to make prize of one, except in one
instance, and in that one, the animal's feet and some parts of
its body were badly burned.

Dr. Young, in the Night Thoughts, with more quaintness than good
taste, compares the sceptic who can remain unmoved in the
contemplation of the starry heavens, to a salamander unwarmed in
the fire:

"An undevout astronomer is mad!
*    *    *    *    *    *
Oh, what a genius must inform the skies!
And is Lorenzo's salamander-heart
Cold and untouched amid these sacred fires?"


Chapter XXX
Eastern Mythology   Zoroaster   Hindu Mythology   Castes   Buddha
  Grand Lama

During the last fifty years new attention has been paid to the
systems of religion of the Eastern world, especially to that of
Zoroaster among the Persians, and that which is called Brahmanism
and the rival system known as Buddhism in the nations farther
east.  Especial interest belongs to these inquiries for us,
because these religions are religions of the great Aryan race to
which we belong.  The people among whom they were introduced all
used some dialect of the family of language to which our own
belongs.  Even young readers will take an interest in such books
as Clarke's Great Religions and Johnson's Oriental Religions,
which are devoted to careful studies of them.

Our knowledge of the religion of the ancient Persians is
principally derived from the Zendavesta, or sacred books of that
people.  Zoroaster was the founder of their religion, or rather
the reformer of the religion which preceded him. The time when he
lived is doubtful, but it is certain that his system became the
dominant religion of Western Asia from the time of Cyrus (550
B.C.) to the conquest of Persia by Alexander the Great.  Under
the Macedonian monarchy the doctrines of Zoroaster appear to have
been considerably corrupted by the introduction of foreign
opinions, but they afterwards recovered their ascendancy.

Zoroaster taught the existence of a supreme being, who created
two other mighty beings, and imparted to them so much of his own
nature as seemed good to him.  Of these, Ormuzd (called by the
Greeks Oromasdes) remained faithful to his creator, and was
regarded as the source of all good, while Ahriman (Arimanes)
rebelled, and became the author of all evil upon the earth.
Ormuzd created man, and supplied him with all the materials of
happiness; but Ahriman marred this happiness by introducing evil
into the world, and creating savage beasts and poisonous reptiles
and plants.  In consequence of this, evil and good are now
mingled together in every part of the world, and the followers of
good and evil   the adherents of Ormuzd and Ahriman   carry on
incessant war.  But this state of things will not last forever.
The time will come when the adherents of Ormuzd shall everywhere
be victorious, and Ahriman and his followers be consigned to
darkness forever.

The religious rites of the ancient Persians were exceedingly
simple.  They used neither temples, altars, nor statues, and
performed their sacrifices on the tops of mountains.  They adored
fire, light, and the sun, as emblems of Ormuzd, the source of all
light and purity, but did not regard them as independent deities.
The religious rites and ceremonies were regulated by the priests,
who were called Magi.  The learning of the Magi was connected
with astrology and enchantment, in which they were so celebrated
that their name was applied to all orders of magicians and
enchanters.

"As to the age of the books of the Zendavesta, and the period at
which Zoroaster lived, there is the greatest difference of
opinion.  He is mentioned by Plato, who speaks of 'the magic (or
religious doctrines) of Zoroaster the Ormazdian.'  As Plato
speaks of his religion as something established in the form of
Magism, or the system of the Medes in West Iran, which the Avesta
appears to have originated in Bactria, or East Iran, this already
carries the age of Zoroaster back to at least the sixth or
seventh century before Christ.
     *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

"Professor Whitney of New Haven places the epoch of Zoroaster at
'least B.C. 1000,' and adds that all attempts to reconstruct
Persian chronology or history prior to the reign of the first
Sassanid have been relinquished as futile.  Dollinger thinks he
may have been 'somewhat later than Moses, perhaps about B.C.
1300,' but says 'it is impossible to fix precisely' when he
lived.  Rawlinson merely remarks that Berosus places him anterior
to B.C. 2234.  Haug is inclined to date the Gathas, the oldest
songs of the Avesta, as early as the time of Moses.  Rapp, after
a thorough comparison of ancient writers, concludes that
Zoroaster lived B.C. 1200 or 1300.  In this he agrees with
Duncker, who, as we have seen, decided upon the same date.  It is
not far from the period given by the oldest Greek writer who
speaks of Zoroaster,   Xanthus of Sardis, a contemporary of
Darius.  It is the period given by Cephalion, a writer of the
second century, who takes it from three independent sources.  We
have no sources now open to us which enable us to come nearer
than this to the time in which he lived.

"Nor is anything known with certainty of the place where he
lived, or the events of his life.  Most modern writers suppose
that he resided in Bactria.  Haug maintains that the language of
the Zend books is Bactrian.  A highly mythological and fabulous
life of Zoroaster, translated by Anquetil du Perron, called the
Zartrisht-Namah, describes him as going to Iran in his thirtieth
year, spending twenty years in the desert, working miracles
during ten years, and giving lessons of philosophy in Babylon,
with Pythagoras as his pupil.  All this is based on the theory
(now proved to be false) of his living in the time of Darius.
'The language of the Avesta,' says Max Muller, 'is so much more
primitive than the inscriptions of Darius, that many centuries
must have passed between the two periods represented by these two
strata of language.  These inscriptions are in the Achaemenian
dialect, which is the Zend in a later stage of linguistic
growth.;"
J. Freeman Clarke - Ten Great Religions

Wordsworth thus alludes to the worship of the Persians:

"  the Persian,   zealous to reject
Altar and Image, and the inclusive walls
And roofs of temples built by human hands,
The loftiest heights ascending from their tops,
With myrtle-wreathed Tiara on his brows,
Presented sacrifice to Moon and Stars
And to the Winds and mother Elements,
And the whole circle of the Heavens, for him
A sensitive existence and a God."
       Excursion, Book IV

In Childe Harold, Byron speaks thus of the Persian worship:

"Not gainly did the early Persian make
His altar the high places and the peak
Of earth o'ergazing mountains, and thus take
A fit and unwalled temple, there to seek
The Spirit, in whose honor shrines are weak,
Upreared of human hands.  Come and compare
Columns and idol-dwellings, Goth or Greek,
With Nature's realms of worship, earth and air,
Nor fix on fond abodes to circumscribe thy prayer."
  III., 91.

The religion of Zoroaster continued to flourish even after the
introduction of Christianity, and in the third century was the
dominant faith of the East, till the rise of the Mahometan power
and the conquest of Persia by the Arabs in the seventh century,
who compelled the greater number of the Persians to renounce
their ancient faith.  Those who refused to abandon the religion
of their ancestors fled to the deserts of Kerman and to
Hindustan, where they still exist under the name of Parsees, a
name derived from Pars, the ancient name of Persia.  The Arabs
call them Guebers, from an Arabic word signifying unbelievers.
At Bombay the Parsees are at this day a very active, intelligent,
and wealthy class.  For purity of life, honesty, and conciliatory
manners, they are favorably distinguished.  They have numerous
temples to Fire, which they adore as the symbol of the divinity.

The Persian religion makes the subject of the finest tale in
Moore's Lalla Rookh, the Fire Worshippers.  The Gueber chief
says:

"Yes!  I am of that impious race,
Those slaves of Fire, that moan and even
Hail their creator's dwelling place
Among the living lights of heaven;
Yes!  I am of that outcast crew
To lean and to vengeance true,
Who curse the hour your Arabs came
To desecrate our shrines of flame,
And swear before God's burning eye,
To break our country's chains or die."

HINDU MYTHOLOGY

The religion of the Hindus is professedly founded on the Vedas.
To these books of their scripture they attach the greatest
sanctity, and state that Brahma himself composed them at the
creation.  But the present arrangement of the Vedas is attributed
to the sage Vyasa, about five thousand years ago.

The Vedas undoubtedly teach the belief of one supreme God.  The
name of this deity is Brahma.  His attributes are represented by
the three personified powers of CREATION, PRESERVATION, and
DESTRUCTION, which, under the respective names of Brahma, Vishnu,
and Siva, form the TRIMURTI or triad of principal Hindu gods.  Of
the inferior gods the most important are, 1. Indra, the god of
heaven, of thunder, lightning, storm, and rain; 2. Agni, the god
of fire; 3. Yana, the god of the infernal regions; 4. Surya, the
god of the sun.

Brahma is the creator of the universe, and the source from which
all the individual deities have sprung, and into which all will
ultimately be absorbed.  "As milk changes to curd, and water to
ice, so is Brahma variously transformed and diversified, without
aid of exterior means of any sort.  The human soul, according to
the Vedas, is a portion of the supreme ruler, as a spark is of
the fire.

"BRAHMA, at first a word meaning prayer and devotion, becomes in
the laws of Manu the primal God, first-born of the creation, from
the self-existent being, in the form of a golden egg.  He became
the creator of all things by the power of prayer.  In the
struggle for ascendancy, which took place between the priests and
the warriors, Brahma naturally became the deity of the former.
But, meantime, as we have seen, the worship or Vishnu had been
extending itself in one region, and that of Siva in another.
Then took place those mysterious wars between the kings of the
Solar and Lunar races, of which the great epics contain all that
we know.  And at the close of these wars a compromise was
apparently accepted, by which Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva were
united in one supreme God, as creator, preserver, and destroyer,
all in one.

It is almost certain that this Hindoo Triad was the result of an
ingenious and successful attempt, on the part of the Brahmans, to
unite all classes of worshippers in India against the Buddhists.
In this sense the Brahmans edited anew the Mahabharata, inserting
in that epic passages extolling Vishnu in the form of Krishna.
The Greek accounts of India which followed the invasion of
Alexander speak of the worship of Hercules as prevalent in the
East, and by Hercules they apparently mean the god Krishna.  The
struggle between the Brahmans and Buddhists lasted during nine
centuries (from A.D. 500 to A.D. 1400), ending with the total
expulsion of Buddhism and the triumphant establishment of the
Triad as the worship of India.

"Before this Triad or Trimurti (of Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva)
there seems to have been another, consisting of Agni, Indra, and
Surya.  This may have given the hint of the second Triad, which
distributed among the three gods the attributes or Creation,
Destruction, and Renovation.  Of these Brahma, the creator,
ceased soon to be popular, and the worship of Siva and Vishnu as
Krishna remain as the popular religion of India. . . ..

"But all the efforts of Brahmanism could not arrest the natural
development of the system.  It passed on into polytheism and
idolatry.  The worship of India for many centuries has been
divided into a multitude of sects.  While the majority of the
Brahmans still profess to recognize the equal divinity of Brahma,
Vishnu, and Siva, the mass of the people worship Krishna, Rama,
the Singam, and many other gods and idols.  There are Hindoo
Atheists, who revile the Vedas; there are the Kabirs, who are a
sort of Hindoo Quakers, and oppose all worship; the RAMANUJAS, an
ancient sect of Vishnu worshippers; the RAMAVATS, living in
monasteries; the PANTHIS, who oppose all austerities; the
MAHARAJAS, whose religion consists with great licentiousness.
Most of these are worshippers of Vishnu or of Siva, for Brahma-
worship has wholly disappeared."  J.  Freeman Clarke.   TEN GREAT
RELIGIONS.

VISHNU

Vishnu occupies the second place in the triad of the Hindus, and
is the personification of the preserving principle.  To protect
the world in various epochs of danger, Vishnu descended to the
earth in different incarnations, or bodily forms, which descents
are called Avatars.  They are very numerous, but ten are more
particularly specified.  The first Avatar was as Matsya, the
Fish, under which form Vishnu preserved Manu, the ancestor of the
human race, during a universal deluge.  The second Avatar was in
the form of a Tortoise, which form he assumed to support the
earth when the gods were churning the sea for the beverage of
immortality, Amrita.

We may omit the other Avatars, which were of the same general
character, that is, interpositions to protect the right or to
punish wrong-doers, and come to the ninth, which is the most
celebrated of the Avatars of Vishnu, in which he appeared in the
human form of Krishna, an invincible warrior, who by his exploits
relieved the earth from the tyrants who oppressed it.

Buddha is by the followers of the Brahmanical religion regarded
as a delusive incarnation of Vishnu, assumed by him in order to
induce the Asuras, opponents of the gods, to abandon the sacred
ordinances of the Vedas, by which means they lost their strength
and supremacy.

Kalki is the name of the TENTH Avatar, in which Vishnu will
appear at the end of the present age of the world to destroy all
vice and wickedness, and to restore mankind to virtue and purity.

SIVA

Siva is the third person of the Hindu triad.  He is the
personification of the destroying principle.  Though the third
named, he is, in respect to the number of his worshippers and the
extension of his worship, before either of the others.  In the
Puranas (the scriptures of the modern Hindu religion) no allusion
is made to the original power of this god as a destroyer; as that
power is not to be called into exercise till after the expiration
of twelve millions of years, or when the universe will come to an
end; and Mahadeva (another name for Siva) is rather the
representative of regeneration than of destruction.

The worshippers of Vishnu and Siva form two sects, each of which
proclaims the superiority of its favorite deity, denying the
claims of the other, and Brahma, the creator, having finished his
work, seems to be regarded as no longer active, and has now only
one temple in India, while Mahadeva and Vishnu have many.  The
worshippers of Vishnu are generally distinguished by a greater
tenderness for life and consequent abstinence from animal food,
and a worship less cruel than that of the followers of Siva.

JUGGERNAUT

Whether the worshippers of Juggernaut are to be reckoned among
the followers of Vishnu or Siva, our authorities differ.  The
temple stands near the shore, about three hundred miles southwest
of Calcutta.  The idol is a carved block of wood, with a hideous
face, painted black, and a distended blood-red mouth.  On
festival days the throne of the image is placed on a tower sixty
feet high, moving on wheels.  Six long ropes are attached to the
tower, by which the people draw it along.  The priests and their
attendants stand round the throne on the tower, and occasionally
turn to the worshippers with songs and gestures.  While the tower
moves along numbers of the devout worshippers throw themselves on
the ground, in order to be crushed by the wheels, and the
multitude shout in approbation of the act, as a pleasing
sacrifice to the idol.  Every year, particularly at two great
festivals in March and July, pilgrims flock in crowds to the
temple.  Not less than seventy or eighty thousand people are said
to visit the place on these occasions, when all castes eat
together.

CASTES

The division of the Hindus into classes or castes, with fixed
occupations, existed from the earliest times.  It is supposed by
some to have been founded upon conquest, the first three castes
being composed of a foreign race, who subdued the natives of the
country and reduced them to an inferior caste.  Others trace it
to the fondness of perpetuating, by descent from father to son,
certain offices or occupations.

The Hindu tradition gives the following account of the origin of
the various castes.  At the creation Brahma resolved to give the
earth inhabitants who should be direct emanations from his own
body.  Accordingly from his mouth came forth the eldest born,
Brahma (the priest), to whom he confided the four Vedas; from his
right arm issued Shatriya (the warrior), and from his left, the
warrior's wife.  His thighs produced Vaissyas, male and female
(agriculturists and traders), and lastly from his feet sprang
Sudras (mechanics and laborers).

The four sons of Brahma, so significantly brought into the world,
became the fathers of the human race, and heads of their
respective castes.  They were commanded to regard the four Vedas
as containing all the rules of their faith, and all that was
necessary to guide them in their religious ceremonies.  They were
also commanded to take rank in the order of their birth, the
Brahmans uppermost, as having sprung from the head of Brahma.

A strong line of demarcation is drawn between the first three
castes and the Sudras.  The former are allowed to receive
instruction from the Vedas, which is not permitted to the Sudras.
The Brahmans possess the privilege of teaching the Vedas, and
were in former times in exclusive possession of all knowledge.
Though the sovereign of the country was chosen from the Shatriya
class, also called Rajputs, the Brahmans possessed the real
power, and were the royal counsellors, the judges and magistrates
of the country; their persons and property were inviolable; and
though they committed the greatest crimes, they could only be
banished from the kingdom.  They were to be treated by sovereigns
with the greatest respect, for "a Brahman, whether learned or
ignorant, is a powerful divinity."

When the Brahman arrives at years of maturity it becomes his duty
to marry.  He ought to be supported by the contributions of the
rich, and not to be obliged to gain his subsistence by any
laborious or productive occupation.  But as all the Brahmans
could not he maintained by the working classes of the community,
it was found necessary to allow them to engage in productive
employments.

We need say little of the two intermediate classes, whose rank
and privileges may be readily inferred from their occupations.
The Sudras or fourth class are bound to servile attendance on the
higher classes, especially the Brahmans, but they may follow
mechanical occupations and practical arts, as painting and
writing, or become traders or husbandmen.  Consequently they
sometimes grow rich, and it will also sometimes happen that
Brahmans become poor.  That fact works its usual consequence, and
rich Sudras sometimes employ poor Brahmans in menial occupations.

There is another class lower even than the Sudras, for it is not
one of the original pure classes, but springs from an
unauthorized union of individuals of different castes.  These are
the Pariahs, who are employed in the lowest services and treated
with the utmost severity.  They are compelled to do what no one
else can do without pollution.  They are not only considered
unclean themselves, but they render unclean every thing they
touch.  They are deprived of all civil rights, and stigmatized by
particular laws, regulating their mode of life, their houses and
their furniture.  They are not allowed to visit the pagodas or
temples of the other castes, but have their own pagodas and
religious exercises.  They are not suffered to enter the houses
of the other castes; if it is done incautiously or from
necessity, the place must be purified by religious ceremonies.
They must not appear at public markets, and are confined to the
use of particular wells, which they are obliged to surround with
bones of animals, to warn others against using them.  They dwell
in miserable hovels, distant from cities and villages, and are
under no restrictions in regard to food, which last is not a
privilege, but a mark of ignominy, as if they were so degraded
that nothing could pollute them.  The three higher castes are
prohibited entirely the use of flesh.  The fourth is allowed to
eat all kinds except beef, but only the lowest caste is allowed
every kind of food without restrictions.

BUDDHA

Buddha, whom the Vedas represent as a delusive incarnation of
Vishnu, is said by his followers to have been a mortal sage,
whose name was Gautama, called also by the complimentary epithets
of Sakyasinha, the Lion, and Buddha, the Sage.

By a comparison of the various epochs assigned to his birth, it
is inferred that he lived about one thousand years before Christ.

He was the son of a king; and when in conformity to the usage of
the country he was, a few days after his birth, presented before
the altar of a deity, the image is said to have inclined its
head, as a presage of the future greatness of the new-born
prophet.  The child soon developed faculties of the first order,
and became equally distinguished by the uncommon beauty of his
person.  No sooner had he grown to years of maturity than he
began to reflect deeply on the depravity and misery of mankind,
and he conceived the idea of retiring from society and devoting
himself to meditation.  His father in vain opposed this design.
Buddha escaped the vigilance of his guards, and having found a
secure retreat, lived for six years undisturbed in his devout
contemplations.  At the expiration of that period he came forward
at Benares as a religious teacher.  At first some who heard him
doubted of the soundness of his mind; but his doctrines soon
gained credit, and were propagated so rapidly that Buddha himself
lived to see them spread all over India.

The young prince distinguished himself by his personal and
intellectual qualities, but still more by his early piety.  It
appears from the laws of Manu that it was not unusual, in the
earliest periods of Brahmanism, for those seeking a superior
piety to turn hermits, and to live alone in the forest, engaged
in acts of prayer, meditation, abstinence, and the study of the
Vedas.  This practice, however, seems to have been confined to
the Brahmans.  It was, therefore, a grief to the king, when his
son, in the flower of his youth and highly accomplished in every
kingly faculty of body and mind, began to turn his thoughts
toward the life of an anchorite.

     *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

He first visited the Brahmans, and listened to their doctrines,
but found no satisfaction therein.  The wisest among them could
not teach him true peace,   that profound inward rest, which was
already called Nirvana.  He was twenty-nine years old.  Although
disapproving of the Brahmanic austerities as an end, he practised
them during six years, in order to subdue the senses.  He then
became satisfied that the path to perfection did not lie that
way.  He therefore resumed his former diet and a more comfortable
mode of life, and so lost many disciples who had been attracted
by his amazing austerity.  Alone in his hermitage, he came at
last to that solid conviction, that KNOWLEDGE never to be shaken,
of the laws of things, which had seemed to him the only
foundation of a truly free life.  The spot where, after a week of
constant meditation, he at last arrived at this beatific vision,
became one of the most sacred places in India.  He was seated
under a tree, his face to the east, not having moved for a day
and night, when he attained the triple science, which was to
rescue mankind from its woes.  Twelve hundred years after the
death of the Buddha, a Chinese pilgrim was shown what then passed
for the sacred tree.

     *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

Having attained this inward certainty of vision, he decided to
teach the world his truth.  He knew well what it would bring him,
  what opposition, insult, neglect, scorn.  But he thought of
three classes of men: those who were already on the way to the
truth and did not need him; those who were fixed in error and
whom he could not help; and the poor doubters, uncertain of their
way.  It was to help these last, the doubters, that the Buddha
went forth to preach.  On his way to the holy city of India,
Benares, a serious difficulty arrested him at the Ganges, namely,
his having no money to pay the boatman for his passage.  At
Benares he made his first converts, "turning the wheel of the
law" for the first time.  His discourses are contained in the
sacred books of the Buddhists.  He converted great numbers, his
father among the rest, but met with fierce opposition from the
Hindu Scribes and Pharisees, the leading Brahmans.  So he lived
and taught, and died at the age of eighty years.

The Buddhists reject entirely the authority of the Vedas, and the
religious observances prescribed in them and kept by the Hindus.
They also reject the distinction of castes, and prohibit all
bloody sacrifices, and allow animal food.  Their priests are
chosen from all classes; they are expected to procure their
maintenance by perambulation and begging, and, among other
things, it is their duty to endeavor to turn to some use things
thrown aside as useless by others, and to discover the medicinal
power of plants.  But in Ceylon three orders of priests are
recognized; those of the highest order are usually men of high
birth and learning, and are supported at the principal temples,
most of which have been richly endowed by the former monarchs of
the country.

For several centuries after the appearance of Buddha, his sect
seems to have been tolerated by the Brahmans, and Buddhism
appears to have penetrated the peninsula of Hindustan in every
direction, and to have been carried to Ceylon, and to the eastern
peninsula.  But afterwards it had to endure in India a long
continued persecution, which ultimately had the effect of
entirely abolishing it in the country where it had originated,
but to scatter it widely over adjacent countries.  Buddhism
appears to have been introduced into China about the year 65 of
our era.  From China it was subsequently extended to Corea,
Japan, and Java.

The charming poem called the Light of Asia, by Mr. Edwin Arnold,
has lately called general attention to Buddhism.  The following
is an extract from it:

"Fondly Siddatha drew the proud head down
Patted the shining neck, and said 'Be still,
White Kantaka!  Be still, and bear me now
The farthest journey ever rider rode;
For this night take I horse to find the truth,
And where my quest will end yet know I not.
Save that it shall not end until I find.
Therefore to-night, good steed, be fierce and bold!
Let nothing stay thee, though a thousand blades
Deny the road!  Let neither wall nor moat
Forbid our flight!  Look!  If I touch thy flank
And cry, "On, Kantaka!" let whirlwinds lag
Behind thy course!  Be fire and air, my horse!
To stead thy lord, so shalt thou share with him
The greatness of this deed which helps the world;
For therefore ride I, not for men alone,
But for all things which, speechless, share our pain,
And have no hope, nor wit to ask for hope.
Now, therefore, hear thy master valorously!'"

THE GRAND LAMA

It is a doctrine alike of the Brahminical Hindus and of the
Buddhist sect that the confinement of the human soul, an
emanation of the divine spirit, in a human body, is a state of
misery, and the consequence of frailties and sins committed
during former existences.  But they hold that some few
individuals have appeared on this earth from time to time, not
under the necessity of terrestrial existence, but who voluntarily
descend to the earth to promote the welfare of mankind.  These
individuals have gradually assumed the character of reappearances
of Buddha himself, in which capacity the line is continued till
the present day in the several Lamas of Thibet, China, and other
countries where Buddhism prevails.  In consequence of the
victories of Gengis Khan and his successors, the Lama residing in
Thibet was raised to the dignity of chief pontiff of the sect.  A
separate province was assigned to him as his own territory, and
besides his spiritual dignity, he became to a limited extent a
temporal monarch.  He is styled the Dalai Lama.

The first Christian missionaries who proceeded to Thibet were
surprised to find there in the heart of Asia a pontifical court
and several other ecclesiastical institutions resembling those of
the Roman Catholic church.  They found convents for priests and
nuns; also, processions and forms of religious worship, attended
with much pomp and splendor; and many were induced by these
similarities to consider Lamaism as a sort of degenerated
Christianity.  It is not improbable that the Lamas derived some
of these practices from the Nestorial Christians, who were
settled in Tartary when Buddhism was introduced into Thibet.

PRESTER JOHN

An early account, communicated probably by travelling merchants,
of a Lama or spiritual chief among the Tartars, seems to have
occasioned in Europe the report of a Presbyter or Prester John, a
Christian pontiff, resident in Upper Asia.  The Pope sent a
mission in search of him, as did also Louis IX of France, some
years later, but both missions were unsuccessful, though the
small communities of Nestorial Christians, which they did find,
served to keep up the belief in Europe that such a personage did
exist somewhere in the East.  At last in the fifteenth century, a
Portuguese traveller, Pedro Covilham, happening to hear that
there was a Christian prince in the country of the Abessines
(Abyssinia), not far from the Red Sea, concluded that this must
be the true Prester John.  He accordingly went thither, and
penetrated to the court of the king, whom he calls Negus.  Milton
alludes to him in Paradise Lost, Book XI, where, describing
Adam's vision of his descendants in their various nations and
cities, scattered over the face of the earth, he says,

"----- Nor did his eyes not ken
The empire of Negus, to his utmost port
Ercoco, and the less maritime kings,
Mombaza and Quiloa and Melind."


Chapter XXXI
Northern Mythology   Valhalla   The Valkyrior

The stories which have engaged our attention thus far relate to
the mythology of southern regions.  But there is another branch
of ancient superstitions which ought not to be entirely
overlooked, especially as it belongs to the nations from which
we, through our English ancestors, derive our origin.  It is that
of the northern nations called Scandinavians, who inhabited the
countries now known as Sweden, Denmark, Norway, and Iceland.
These mythological records are contained in two collections
called the Eddas, of which the oldest is in poetry and dates back
to the year 1056, the more modern, or prose Edda, being of the
date of 1640.

According to the Eddas there was once no heaven above nor earth
beneath, but only a bottomless deep, and a world of mist in which
flowed a fountain.  Twelve rivers issued from this fountain, and
when they had flowed far from their source, they froze into ice,
and one layer accumulating above another, the great deep was
filled up.

Southward from the world of mist was the world of light.  From
this flowed a warm wind upon the ice and melted it.  The vapors
rose in the air and formed clouds, from which sprang Ymir, the
Frost giant and his progeny, and the cow Audhumbla, whose milk
afforded nourishment and food to the giant.  The cow got
nourishment by licking the hoar frost and salt from the ice.
While she was one day licking the salt stones there appeared at
first the hair of a man, on the second day the whole head, and on
the third the entire form endowed with beauty, agility, and
power.  This new being was a god, from whom and his wife, a
daughter of the giant race, sprang the three brothers Odin, Vili,
and Ve.  They slew the giant Ymir, and out of his body formed the
earth, of his blood the seas, of his bones the mountains, of his
hair the trees, of his skull the heavens, and of his brain
clouds, charged with hail and snow.  Of Ymir's eyebrows the gods
formed Midgard (mid earth), destined to become the abode of man.

Odin then regulated the periods of day and night and the seasons
by placing in the heavens the sun and moon, and appointing to
them their respective courses.  As soon as the sun began to shed
its rays upon the earth, it caused the vegetable world to bud and
sprout.  Shortly after the gods had created the world they walked
by the side of the sea, pleased with their new work, but found
that it was still incomplete, for it was without human beings.
They therefore took an ash-tree and made a man out of it, and
they made a woman out of an alder, and called the man Aske and
the woman Embla.  Odin then gave them life and soul, Vili reason
and motion, and Ve bestowed upon them the senses, expressive
features, and speech.  Midgard was then given them as their
residence, and they became the progenitors of the human race.

The mighty ash-tree Ygdrasil was supposed to support the whole
universe.  It sprang from the body of Ymir, and had three immense
roots, extending one into Asgard (the dwelling of the gods), the
other into Jotunheim (the abode of the giants), and the third to
Niffleheim (the regions of darkness and cold).  By the side of
each of these roots is a spring, from which it is watered.  The
root that extends into Asgard is carefully tended by the three
Norns, goddesses who are regarded as the dispensers of fate.
They are Urdur (the past), Verdandi (the present), Skuld (the
future).  The spring at the Jotunheim side is Ymir's well, in
which wisdom and wit lie hidden, but that of Niffleheim feeds the
adder, Nidhogge (darkness), which perpetually gnaws at the root.
Four harts run across the branches of the tree and bite the buds;
they represent the four winds.  Under the tree lies Ymir, and
when he tries to shake off its weight the earth quakes.

Asgard is the name of the abode of the gods, access to which is
only gained by crossing the bridge, Bifrost (the rainbow).
Asgard consists of golden and silver palaces, the dwellings of
the gods, but the most beautiful of these is Valhalla, the
residence of Odin.  When seated on his throne he overlooks all
heaven and earth.  Upon his shoulders are the ravens Hugin and
Munin, who fly every day over the whole world, and on their
return report to him all they have seen and heard.  At his feet
lie his two wolves, Geri, and Freki, to whom Odin gives all the
meat that is set before him, for he himself stands in no need of
food.  Mead is for him both food and drink.  He invented the
Runic characters, and it is the business of the Norns to engrave
the runes of fate upon a metal shield.  From Odin's name, spelt
Wodin, as it sometimes is, came Wednesday, the name of the fourth
day of the week.

Odin is frequently called Alfadur (All-father), but this name is
sometimes used in a way that shows that the Scandinavians had an
idea of a deity superior to Odin, uncreated and eternal.

OF THE JOYS OF VALHALLA

Valhalla is the great hall of Odin, wherein he feasts with his
chosen heroes, all those who have fallen bravely in battle, for
all who die a peaceful death are excluded.  The flesh of the boar
Schrimnir is served up to them, and is abundant for all.  For
although this boar is cooked every morning, he becomes whole
again every night.  For drink the heroes are supplied abundantly
with mead from the she-goat Heidrun.  When the heroes are not
feasting they amuse themselves with fighting.  Every day they
ride out into the court or field and fight until they cut each
other in pieces.  This is their pastime; but when meal-time
comes, they recover from their wounds and return to feast in
Valhalla.

THE VALKYRIOR

The Valkyrior are warlike virgins, mounted upon horses and armed
with helmets, shields, and spears.  Odin, who is desirous to
collect a great many heroes in Valhalla, to be able to meet the
giants in a day when the final contest must come, sends down to
every battle-field to make choice of those who shall be slain.
The Valkyrior are his messengers, and their name means "Choosers
of the slain."  When they ride forth on their errand their armor
shed a strange flickering light, which flashes up over the
northern skies, making what men call the "Aurora Borealis," or
"Northern Lights."  (Gray's ode, The Fatal Sisters, is founded on
this superstition.)

The following is by Matthew Arnold:

"-----He crew at dawn a cheerful note,
To wake the gods and heroes to their tasks
And all the gods and all the heroes woke.
And from their beds the heroes rose and donned
Their arms, and led their horses from the stall,
And mounted them, and in Valhalla's court
Were ranged; and then the daily fray began,
And all day long they there are hacked and hewn
'Mid dust and groans, and limbs lopped off, and blood;
But all at night return to Odin's hall
Woundless and fresh; such lot is theirs in heaven.
And the Valkyries on their steeds went forth
Toward earth and fights of men; and at their side
Skulda, the youngest of the Nornies, rode;
And over Bifrost, where is Heimdall's watch,
Past Midgard Fortress, down to Earth they came;
There through some battle-field, where men fall fast,
Their horses fetlock-deep in blood, they ride,
And pick the bravest warriors out for death,
Whom they bring back with them at night to heaven,
To glad the gods, and feast in Odin's hall."
BALDER DEAD

This description of The Funeral of Balder is by William Morris:

"----------Guest
Gazed through the cool dusk, till his eyes did rest
Upon the noble stories, painted fair
On the high panelling and roof-boards there;
For over the high sea, in his ship, there lay
The gold-haired Balder, god of the dead day,
The spring-flowers round his high pile, waiting there
Until the gods there to the torch should bear;
And they were wrought on this side and on that,
Drawing on towards him.  There was Frey, and sat
On the gold-bristled boar, who first they say
Ploughed the brown earth, and made it green for Frey;
Then came dark-bearded Niod; and after him
Freyia, thin-robed, about her ankles slim
The grey cats playing.  In another place
Thor's hammer gleamed o'er Thor's red-bearded face;
And Heimdal, with the old horn slung behind,
That in the god's dusk he shall surely wind,
Sickening all hearts with fear; and last of all,
Was Odin's sorrow wrought upon the wall.
As slow-paced, weary faced, he went along,
Anxious with all the tales of woe and wrong
His ravens, Thought and Memory, bring to him."
THE EARTHLY PARADISE: THE LOVERS OF GODRUN

THOR
OF THOR AND THE OTHER GODS

Thor, the thunderer, Odin's eldest son, is the strongest of gods
and men, and possesses three very precious things.  The first is
his hammer, Miolnir, which both the Frost and the Mountain giants
know to their cost, when they see it hurled against them in the
air, for it has split many a skull of their fathers and kindred.
When thrown, it returns to his hand of its own accord.  The
second rare thing he possesses is called the belt of strength.
When he girds it about him his divine might is doubled.  The
third, also very precious, is his iron gloves, which he puts on
whenever he would use his mallet efficiently.  From Thor's name
is derived our word Thursday.

This description of Thor is by Longfellow:

"I am the God Thor,
I am the War God,
I am the Thunderer!
Here in my Northland,
My fastness and fortress,
Reign I forever!

"Here amid icebergs
Rule I the nations;
This is my hammer,
Miolner the mighty;
Giants and sorcerers
Cannot withstand it!

"These are the gauntlets
Wherewith I wield it,
And hurl it afar off;
This is my girdle;
Whenever I brace it
Strength is redoubled!

"The light thou beholdest
Stream through the heavens,
In flashes of crimson,
Is but my red beard
Blown by the night wind,
Affrighting the nations!

"Jove is my brother;
Mine eyes are the lightning;
The wheels of my chariot
Roll in the thunder,
The blows of my hammer
ring in the thunder."
TALES OF A WAYSIDE INN

Frey is one of the most celebrated of the gods.  He presides over
rain and sunshine and all the fruits of the earth.  His sister
Freya is the most propitious of the goddesses.  She loves music,
spring, and flowers, and is particularly fond of the Elves
(fairies).  She is very fond of love-ditties, and all lovers
would do well to invoke her.

Bragi is the god of poetry, and his song records the deeds of
warriors.  His wife, Iduna, keeps in a box the apples which the
gods, when they feel old age approaching, have only to taste of
to become young again.

Heimdall is the watchman of the gods, and is therefore placed on
the borders of heaven to prevent the giants from forcing their
way over the bridge Bifrost (the rainbow.)  He requires less
sleep than a bird, and sees by night as well as by day a hundred
miles all around him.  So acute is his ear that no sound escapes
him, for he can even hear the grass grow and the wool on a
sheep's back.

OF LOKI AND HIS PROGENY

There is another deity who is described as the calumniator of the
gods and the contriver of all fraud and mischief.  His name is
Loki.  He is handsome and well made, but of a very fickle mood
and  most evil disposition.  He is of the giant race, but forced
himself into the company of the gods, and seems to take pleasure
in bringing them into difficulties, and in extricating them out
of the danger by his cunning, wit, and skill.  Loki has three
children.  The first is the wolf Fenris, the second the Midgard
serpent, the third Hela (Death).  The gods were not ignorant that
these monsters were growing up, and that they would one day bring
much evil upon gods and men.  So Odin deemed it advisable to send
one to bring them to him.  When they came he threw the serpent
into that deep ocean by which the earth is surrounded.  But the
monster has grown to such an enormous size that holding his tail
in his mouth he encircles the whole earth.  Hela he cast into
Niffleheim, and gave her power over nine worlds or regions, into
which she distributes those who are sent to her; that is, all who
die of sickness or old age.  Her hall is called Elvidnia.  Hunger
is her table, Starvation her knife, Delay her man, Slowness her
maid, Precipice her threshold, Care her bed, and Burning-anguish
forms the hangings of her apartments.  She may easily be
recognized for her body is half flesh-color and half blue, and
she has a dreadfully stern and forbidding countenance.

The wolf Fenris gave the gods a great deal of trouble before they
succeeded in chaining him.  He broke the strongest fetters as if
they were made of cobwebs.  Finally the gods sent a messenger to
the mountain spirits, who made for them the chain called
Gleipnir.  It is fashioned of six things, viz., th noise made by
the footfall of a cat, the beards of women, the roots of stones,
the breath of fishes, the nerves (sensibilities) of bears, and
the spittle of birds.  When finished it was as smooth and soft as
a silken string.  But when the gods asked the wolf to suffer
himself to be bound with this apparently slight ribbon, he
suspected their design, fearing that it was made by enchantment.
But Tyr (the sword god), to quiet his suspicions, placed his hand
in Fenris' mouth.  Then the other gods bound the wolf with
Gleipnir.  But when the wolf found that he could not break his
fetters, and that the gods would not release him, he bit off
Tyr's hand, and he has ever since remained one-handed.

HOW THOR PAID THE MOUNTAIN GIANT HIS WAGES

Once on a time, when the gods were constructing their abodes and
had already finished Midgard and Valhalla, a certain artificer
came and offered to build them a residence so well fortified that
they should be perfectly safe from the incursions of the Frost
giants and the giants of the mountains.  But he demanded for his
reward the goddess Freya, together with the sun and moon.  The
gods yielded to his terms provided he would finish the whole work
himself without any one's assistance, and all within the space of
one winter.  But if anything remained unfinished on the first day
of summer he should forfeit the recompense agreed on.  On being
told these terms the artificer stipulated that he should be
allowed the use of his horse Svadilfari, and this by the advice
of Loki was granted to him.  He accordingly set to work on the
first day of winter, and during the night let his horse draw
stone for the building.  The enormous size of the stones struck
the gods with astonishment, and they saw clearly that the horse
did one half more of the toilsome work than his mater.  Their
bargain, however, had been concluded, and confirmed by solemn
oaths, for without these precautions a giant would not have
thought himself safe among the gods, especially when Thor should
return from an expedition he had then undertaken against the evil
demons.

As the winter drew to a close, the building was far advanced, and
the bulwarks were sufficiently high and massive to render the
place impregnable.  In short, when it wanted but three days to
summer the only part that remained to be finished was the
gateway.  Then sat the gods on their seats of justice and entered
into consultation, inquiring of one another who among them could
have advised to give Freya away, or to plunge the heavens in
darkness by permitting the giant to carry away the sun and the
moon.

They all agreed that no one but Loki, the author of so many evil
deeds, could have given such bad counsel, and that he should be
put to a cruel death if he did not contrive some way to prevent
the artificer from completing his task and obtaining the
stipulated recompense.  They proceeded to lay hands on Loki, who
in his fright promised upon oath that, let it cost what it would,
he would so manage matters that the man should lose his reward.
That very night when the man went with Svadilfari for building-
stone, a mare suddenly ran out of a forest and began to neigh.
The horse thereat broke loose and ran after the mare into the
forest, which obliged the man also to run after his horse, and
thus between one and another the whole night was lost, so that at
dawn the work had not made the usual progress.  The man, seeing
that he must fail of completing his task, resumed his own
gigantic stature, and the gods now clearly perceived that it was
in reality a mountain giant who had come amongst them.  Feeling
no longer bound by their oaths, they called on Thor, who
immediately ran to their assistance, and lifting up his mallet,
paid the workman his wages, not with the sun and moon, and not
even by sending him back to Jotunheim, for with the first blow he
shattered the giant's skull to pieces and hurled him headlong
into Niffleheim.

 THE RECOVERY OF THE HAMMER

Once upon a time it happened that Thor's hammer fell into the
possession of the giant Thrym, who buried it eight fathoms deep
under the rocks of Jotunheim.  Thor sent Loki to negotiate with
Thrym, but he could only prevail so far as to get the giant's
promise to restore the weapon if Freya would consent to be his
bride.  Loki returned and reported the result of his mission, but
the goddess of love was quite horrified at the idea of bestowing
her charms on the king of the Frost giants.  In this emergency
Loki persuaded Thor to dress himself in Freya's clothes and
accompany him to Jotunheim.  Thrym received his veiled bride with
due courtesy, but was greatly surprised at seeing her eat for her
supper eight salmon and a full-grown ox, besides other
delicacies, washing the whole down with three tuns of mead.
Loki, however, assured him that she had not tasted anything for
eight long nights, so great was her desire to see her lover, the
renowned ruler or Jotunheim.  Thrym had at length the curiosity
to peep under his bride's veil, but started back in affright, and
demanded why Freya's eyeballs glistened with fire.  Loki repeated
the same excuse and the giant was satisfied.  He ordered the
hammer to be brought in and laid on the maiden's lap.  Thereupon
Thor threw off his disguise, grasped his redoubted weapon and
slaughtered Thrum and all his followers.

Frey also possessed a wonderful weapon, a sword which would of
itself spread a field with carnage whenever the owner desired it.
Frey parted with this sword, but was less fortunate than Thor and
never recovered it.  It happened in this way: Frey once mounted
Odin's throne, from whence one can see over the whole universe,
and looking round saw far off in the giant's kingdom a beautiful
maid, at the sight of whom he was struck with sudden sadness,
insomuch that from that moment he could neither sleep, nor drink,
nor speak.  At last Skirnir, his messenger, drew his secret from
him, and undertook to get him the maiden for his bride, if he
would give him his sword as a reward.  Frey consented and gave
him the sword, and Skirnir set off on his journey and obtained
the maiden's promise that within nine nights she would come to a
certain place and there wed Frey.  Skirnir having reported the
success of his errand, Frey exclaimed,

"Long is one night,
Long are two nights,
But how shall I hold out three?
Shorter hath seemed
A month to me oft
Than of this longing time the half."

So Frey obtained Gerda, the most beautiful of all women, for his
wife, but he lost his sword.

This story, entitled Skirnir For, and the one immediately
preceding it, Thrym's Quida, will be found poetically told in
Longfellow's Poets and Poetry of Europe.


Chapter XXXII
Thor's Visit to Jotunheim

One day the god Thor, accompanied by his servant Thialfi, and
also by Loki, set out on a journey to the giant's country.
Thialfi was of all men the swiftest of foot.  He bore Thor's
wallet, containing their provisions.  When night came on they
found themselves in an immense forest, and searched on all sides
for a place where they might pass the night, and at last came to
a very large hall, with an entrance that took the whole breadth
of one end of the building.  Here they lay down to sleep, but
towards midnight were alarmed by an earthquake which shook the
whole edifice.  Thor rising up called on his companion to seek
with him a place of safety.  On the right they found an adjoining
chamber, into which the others entered, but Thor remained at the
doorway with his mallet in his hand, prepared to defend himself,
whatever might happen.  A terrible groaning was heard during the
night, and at dawn of day Thor went out and found lying near him
a huge giant, who slept and snored in the way that had alarmed
them so.  It is said that for once Thor was afraid to use his
mallet, and as the giant soon waked up, Thor contented himself
with simply asking his name.

"My name is Skrymir," said the giant, "but I need not ask thy
name, for I know that thou art the god Tor.  But what has become
of my glove?"  Thor then perceived that what they had taken
overnight for a hall was the giant's glove and the chamber where
his two companions had sought refuge was the thumb.  Skrymir then
proposed that they should travel in company, and Thor consenting,
they sat down to eat their breakfast, and when they had done,
Skrymir packed all the provisions into one wallet, threw it over
his shoulder, and strode on before them, taking such tremendous
strides that they were hard put to it to keep up with him.  So
they travelled the whole day, and at dusk, Skrymir close a place
for them to pass the night in under a large oak-tree.  Skrymir
then told them he would lie down to sleep.  "But take ye the
wallet," he added, "and prepare your supper."Skrymir soon fell
asleep and began to snore strongly, but when Thor tried to open
the wallet, he found the giant had tied it up so tight he could
not untie a single knot.  At last Thor became wroth, and grasping
his mallet with both hands he struck a furious blow on the
giant's head.  Skrymir awakening merely asked whether a leaf had
not fallen on his head, and whether they had supped and were
ready to go to sleep.  Thor answered that they were just going to
sleep, and so saying went and laid himself down under another
tree.  But sleep came not that night to Thor, and when Skrymir
snored again so loud that the forest re-echoed with the noise, he
arose, and grasping his mallet launched it with such force at the
giant's skull that it made a deep dint in it.  Skrymir awakening
cried out, "What's the matter?  Are there any birds perched on
this tree?  I felt some moss from the branches fall on my head.
How fares it with thee, Thor?"  But Thor went away hastily,
saying that he had just then awoke, and that as it was only
midnight, there was still time for sleep.  He however resolved
that if he had an opportunity of striking a third blow, it should
settle all matters between them.  A little before daybreak he
perceived that Skrymir was again fast asleep, and again grasping
his mallet, he dashed it with such violence that it forced its
way into the giant's skull up to the handle.   But Skrymir sat
up, and stroking his cheek, said, "An acorn fell on my head.
What!  Art thou awake, Thor?  Methinks it is time for us to get
up and dress ourselves; but you have not now a long way before
you to the city called Utgard.  I have heard you whispering to
one another that I am not a man of small dimensions; but if you
come to Utgard you will see there many men much taller than I.
Wherefore I advise you, when you come there, not to make too much
of yourselves, for the followers of Utgard-Loki will not brook
the boasting of such little fellows as you are.  You must take
the road that leads eastward, mine lies northward, so we must
part here."

Hereupon he threw his wallet over his shoulders, and turned away
from them into the forest, and Thor had no wish to stop him or to
ask for any more of his company.

Thor and his companions proceeded on their way, and towards noon
descried a city standing in the middle of a plain.  It was so
lofty that they were obliged to bend their necks quite back on
their shoulders in order to see to the top of it.  On arriving
they entered the city, and seeing a large palace before them with
the door wide open, they went in, and found a number of men of
prodigious stature, sitting on benches in the hall. Going
further, they came before the king Utgard-Loki, whom they saluted
with great respect.  The king, regarding them with a scornful
smile, said, "If I do not mistake me, that stripling yonder must
be the god Thor."  Then addressing himself to Thor, he said,
"Perhaps thou mayst be more than thou appearest to be.  What are
the feats that thou and thy fellows deem yourselves skilled in,
for no one is permitted to remain here who does not, in some feat
or other, excel all other men?"

"The feat that I know," said Loki, "is to eat quicker than any
one else, and in this I am ready to give a proof against any one
here who may choose to compete with me."

"That will indeed be a feat," said Utgard-Loki, "if thou
performest what thou promisest, and it shall be tried forthwith."

He then ordered one of his men who was sitting at the farther end
of the bench, and whose name was Logi, to come forward and try
his skill with Loki.  A trough filled with meat having been set
on the hall floor, Loki placed himself at one end, and Logi at
the other, and each of them began to eat as fast as he could,
until they met in the middle of the trough.  But it was found
that Loki had only eaten the flesh, while his adversary had
devoured both flesh and bone, and the trough to boot.  All the
company therefore adjudged that Loki was vanquished.

Utgard-Loki then asked what feat the young man who accompanied
Thor could perform.  Thialfi answered that he would run a race
with any one who might be matched against him.  The king observed
that skill in running was something to boast of, but if the youth
would win the match he must display great agility.  He then arose
and went with all who were present to a plain where there was
good ground for running on, and calling a young man named Hugi,
bade him run a match with Thialfi.  In the first course Hugi so
much outstripped his competitor that he turned back and met him
not far from the starting-place.  Then they ran a second and a
third time, but Thialfi met with no better success.  Utgard-Loki
then asked Thor in what feats he would choose to give proofs of
that prowess for which he was so famous.  Thor answered that he
would try a drinking-match with any one.  Utgard-Loki bade his
cupbearer bring the large horn which his followers were obliged
to empty when they had trespassed in any way against the law of
the feast.  The cupbearer having presented it to Thor, Utgard-
Loki said, "Whoever is a good drinker will empty that horn at a
single draught, though most men make two of it, but the most puny
drinker can do it in three."

Thor looked at the horn, which seemed of no extraordinary size
though somewhat long; however, as he was very thirsty, he set it
to his lips, and without drawing breath, pulled as long and as
deeply as he could, that he might not be obliged to make a second
draught of it; but when he set the horn down and looked in, he
could scarcely perceive that the liquor was diminished.

After taking breath, Thor went to it again with all his might,
but when he took the horn from his mouth, it seemed to him that
he had drunk rather less than before, although the horn could now
be carried without spilling.

"How now, Thor," said Utgard-Loki, "thou must not spare thyself;
if thou meanest to drain the horn at the third draught thou must
pull deeply; and I must needs say that thou wilt not be called so
mighty a man here as thou art at home if thou showest no greater
prowess in other feats than methinks will be shown in this."

Thor, full of wrath, again set the horn to his lips, and did his
best to empty it; but on looking in found the liquor was only a
little lower, so he resolved to make no further attempt, but gave
back the horn to the cupbearer.

"I now see plainly," said Utgard-Loki, "that thou art not quite
so stout as we thought thee; but wilt thou try any other feat,
though methinks thou art not likely to bear any prize away with
thee hence."

"What new trial hast thou to propose?" said Thor.

"We have a very trifling game here," answered Utgard-Loki, "in
which we exercise none but children.  It consists in merely
lifting my cat from the ground; nor should I have dared to
mention such a feat to the great Thor if I had not already
observed that thou art by no means what we took thee for."

As he finished speaking, a large gray cat sprang on the hall
floor.  Thor put his hand under the cat's belly and did his
utmost to raise him from the floor, but the cat, bending his
back, had, notwithstanding all Thor's efforts, only one of his
feet lifted up, seeing which Thor made no further attempt.

"This trial has turned out," said Utgard-Loki, "just as I
imagined it would.  The cat is large, but Thor is little in
comparison to our men."

"Little as ye call me," answered Thor, "let me see who among you
will come hither now I am in wrath and wrestle with me."

"I see no one here," said Utgard-Loki, looking at the men sitting
on the benches, "who would not think it beneath him to wrestle
with thee; let somebody, however, call hither that old crone, my
nurse Elli, and let Thor wrestle with her if he will.  She has
thrown to the ground many a man not less strong than this Thor
is."

A toothless old woman then entered the hall, and was told by
Utgard-Loki to take hold of Thor.  The tale is shortly told.  The
more Thor tightened his hold on the crone the firmer she stood.
At length, after a very violent struggle, Thor began to lose his
footing, and was finally brought down upon one knee.  Utgard-Loki
then told them to desist, adding that Thor had now no occasion to
ask any one else in the hall to wrestle with him, and it was also
getting late; so he showed Thor and his companions to their
seats, and they passed the night there in good cheer.

The next morning at break of day, Thor and his companions dressed
themselves and prepared for their departure.  Utgard-Loki ordered
a table to be set for them, on which there was no lack of
victuals or drink.  After the repast Utgard-Loki led them to the
gate of the city, and on parting asked Thor how he thought his
journey had turned out, and whether he had met with any men
stronger than himself.  Thor told him that he could not deny but
that he had brought great shame on himself.  "And what grieves me
most," he added, is that ye will call me a person of little
worth."

"Nay," said Utgard-Loki, "it behooves me to tell thee the truth,
now thou art out of the city, which so long as I live and have my
way thou shalt never enter again.  And, by my troth, had I known
beforehand that thou hadst so much strength in thee, and wouldst
have brought me so near to a great mishap, I would not have
suffered thee to enter this time.  Know then that I have all
along deceived thee by my illusions; first in the forest where I
tied up the wallet with iron wire so that thou couldst not untie
it.  After this thou gavest me three blows with the mallet; the
first, though the least, would have ended my days had it fallen
on me, but I slipped aside and thy blows fell on the mountain
where thou wilt find three glens, one of them remarkably deep.
These are the dints made by thy mallet.  I have made use of
similar illusions in the contests you have had with my followers.
In the first, Loki, like hunger itself, devoured all that was set
before him, but Logi was in reality nothing else than Fire, and
therefore consumed not only the meat, but the trough which held
it.  Hugi, with whom Thialfi contended in running, was Thought,
and it was impossible for Thialfi to keep pace with that.  When
thou in thy turn didst attempt to empty the horn, thou didst
perform, by my troth, a deed so marvellous, that had I not seen
it myself, I should never have believed it.  For one end of that
horn reached the sea, which thou was not aware of, but when thou
comest to the shore thou wilt perceive how much the sea has sunk
by thy draughts.  Thou didst perform a feat no less wonderful by
lifting up the cat, and to tell thee the truth, when we saw that
one of his paws was off the floor, we were all of us terror-
stricken, for what thou tookest for a cat was in reality the
Midgard serpent that encompasseth the earth, and he was so
stretched by thee, that he was barely long enough to enclose it
between his head and tail.  Thy wrestling with Elli was also a
most astonishing feat, for there was never yet a man, nor ever
will be, whom Old Age, for such in fact was Elli, will not sooner
or later lay low.  But now, as we are going to part, let me tell
thee that it will be better for both of us if thou never come
near me again, for shouldst thou do so, I shall again defend
myself by other illusions, so that thou wilt only lose thy labor
and get no fame from the contest with me."


On hearing these words Thor in a rage laid hold of his mallet and
would have launched it at him, but Utgard-Loki had disappeared,
and when Thor would have returned to the city to destroy it, he
found nothing around him but a verdant plain.

On another occasion Thor was more successful in an encounter with
the giants.  It happened that Thor met with a giant, Hrungnir by
name, who was disputing with Odin as to the merits of their
respective horses, Gullfaxi and Sleipnir, the eight-legged.  Thor
and the giant made an agreement to fight together on a certain
day.  But as the day approached, the giant, becoming frightened
at the thought of encountering Thor alone, manufactured, with the
assistance of his fellow-giants, a great giant of clay.  He was
nine miles high and three miles about the chest, and in his heart
he had the heart of a mare.  Accompanied by the clay giant,
Hrungnir awaited Thor on the appointed day.  Thor approached
preceded by Thialfi, his servant, who, running ahead, shouted out
to Hrungnir that it was useless to hold his shield before him,
for the god Thor would attack him out of the ground.  Hrungnir at
this flung his shield on the ground, and, standing upon it, made
ready.  As Thor approached Hrungnir flung at him an immense club
of stone.  Thor flung his hammer.  Miolnir met the club half way,
broke it in pieces, and burying itself in the stone skull of
Hrungnir, felled him to the ground.  Meanwhile Thialfi had
despatched the clay giant with a spade.  Thor himself received
but a slight wound from a fragment of the giant's hammer.


Chapter XXXIII
The Death of Baldur   The Elves -- Runic Letters -- Scalds --
Iceland

Baldur, the Good, having been tormented with terrible dreams
indicating that his life was in peril, told them to the assembled
gods, who resolved to conjure all things to avert from him the
threatened danger.  Then Frigga, the wife of Odin, exacted an
oath from fire and water, from iron and all other metals, from
stones, trees, diseases, beasts, birds, poisons, and creeping
things, that none of them would do any harm to Baldur.  Odin, not
satisfied with all this, and feeling alarmed for the fate of his
son, determined to consult the prophetess Angerbode, a giantess,
mother of Fenris, Hela, and the Midgard serpent.  She was dead,
and Odin was forced to seek her in Hela's dominions.  This
descent of Odin forms the subject of Gray's fine ode beginning,

"Up rose the king of men with speed
And saddled straight his coal-black steed."

But the other gods, feeling that what Frigga had done was quite
sufficient, amused themselves with using Baldur as a mark, some
hurling darts at him, some stones, while others hewed at him with
their swords and battle-axes, for do what they would none of them
could harm him.  And this became a favorite pastime with them and
was regarded as an honor shown to Baldur.  But when Loki beheld
the scene he was sorely vexed that Baldur was not hurt.
Assuming, therefore, the shape of a woman, he went to Fensalir,
the mansion of Frigga.  That goddess, when she saw the pretended
woman, inquired of her if she knew what the gods were doing at
their meetings.  She replied that they were throwing darts and
stones at Baldur, without being able to hurt him.  "Ay," said
Frigga, "neither stones, nor sticks, nor anything else can hurt
Baldur, for I have exacted an oath from all of them.  " "What,"
exclaimed the woman, "have all things sworn to spare Baldur?"
"All things," replied Frigga, "except one little shrub that grows
on the eastern side of Valhalla, and is called Mistletoe, and
which I thought too young and feeble to crave an oath from."

As soon as Loki heard this he went away, and resuming his natural
shape, cut off the mistletoe, and repaired to the place where the
gods were assembled.  There he found Hodur standing apart,
without partaking of the sports, on account of his blindness, and
going up to him, said, "Why dost thou not also throw something at
Baldur?"

"Because I am blind," answered Hodur, "and see not where Baldur
is, and have moreover nothing to throw."

"Come, then," said Loki, "do like the rest and show honor to
Baldur by throwing this twig at him, and I will direct thy arm
towards the place where he stands."

Hodur then took the mistletoe, and under the guidance of Loki,
darted it at Baldur, who, pierced through and through, fell down
lifeless.  Surely never was there witnessed, either among gods or
men, a more atrocious deed than this.  When Baldur fell, the gods
were struck speechless with horror, and then they looked at each
other, and all were of one mind to lay hands on him who had done
the deed, but they were obliged to delay their vengeance out of
respect for the sacred place where they were assembled.  They
gave vent to their grief by loud lamentations.  When the gods
came to themselves, Frigga asked who among them wished to gain
all her love and good will.  "For this," said she, "shall he have
who will ride to Hel and offer Hela a ransom if she will let
Baldur return to Asgard."  Whereupon Hermod, surnamed the Nimble,
the son of Odin, offered to undertake the journey.  Odin's horse,
Sleipnir, which has eight legs, and can outrun the wind, was then
led forth, on which Hermod mounted and galloped away on his
mission.  For the space of nine days and as many nights he rode
through deep glens so dark that he could not discern anything
until he arrived at the river Gyoll, which he passed over on a
bridge covered with glittering gold.  The maiden who kept the
bridge asked him his name and lineage, telling him that the day
before five bands of dead persons had ridden over the bridge, and
did not shake it as much as he alone.  "But," she added, "thou
hast not death's hue on thee; why then ridest thou here on the
way to Hel?"

"I ride to Hel," answered Hermod, "to seek Baldur.  Hast thou
perchance seen him pass this way?"

She replied, "Baldur hath ridden over Gyoll's bridge, and yonder
lieth the way he took to the abodes of death."

Hermod pursued his journey until he came to the barred gates of
Hel.  Here he alighted, girthed his saddle tighter, and
remounting clapped both spurs to his horse, who cleared the gate
by a tremendous leap without touching it.  Hermod then rode on to
the palace where he found his brother Baldur occupying the most
distinguished seat in the hall, and passed the night in his
company.  The next morning he besought Hela to let Baldur ride
home with him, assuring her that nothing but lamentations were to
be heard among the gods.  Hela answered that it should now be
tried whether Baldur was so beloved as he was said to be.  "If,
therefore," she added, "all things in the world, both living and
lifeless, weep for him, then shall he return to life; but if any
one thing speak against him or refuse to weep, he shall be kept
in Hel."

Hermod then rode back to Asgard and gave an account of all he had
heard and witnessed.

The gods upon this despatched messengers throughout the world to
beg every thing to weep in order that Baldur might be delivered
from Hel.  All things very willingly complied with this request,
both men and every other living being, as well as earths, and
stones, and trees, and metals, just as we have all seen these
things weep when they are brought from a cold place into a hot
one.  As the messengers were returning, they found an old hag
named Thaukt sitting in a cavern, and begged her to weep Baldur
out of Hel.  But she answered,

"Thaukt will wail
With dry tears
Baldur's bale-fire.
Let Hela keep her own."

It was strongly suspected that this hag was no other than Loki
himself, who never ceased to work evil among gods and men.  So
Baldur was prevented from coming back to Asgard.  (In
Longfellow's Poems, vol. 1, page 379, will be found a poem
entitled Tegner's Drapa, upon the subject of Baldur's death.)

Among Matthew Arnold's Poems is one called "Balder Death"
beginning thus:

"So on the floor lay Balder dead; and round
Lay thickly strewn swords, axes, darts and spears,
Which all the Gods in sport had idly thrown
At Balder, whom no weapon pierced or clave;
But in his breast stood fixt the fatal bough
Of mistletoe, which Lok the Accuser gave
To Hoder, and unwitting Hoder threw;
"Gainst that alone had Balder's life no charm.
And all the Gods and all the heroes came
And stood round Balder on the bloody floor
Weeping and wailing; and Valhalla rang
Up to its golden roof with sobs and cries;
And on the table stood the untasted meats,
And in the horns and gold-rimmed skulls the wine;
And now would night have fallen and found them yet
Wailing; but otherwise was Odin's will."

THE FUNERAL OF BALDUR

The gods took up the dead body and bore it to the sea-shore where
stood Baldur's ship Hringham, which passed for the largest in the
world.  Baldur's dead body was put on the funeral pile, on board
the ship, and his wife Nanna was so struck with grief at the
sight that she broke her heart, and her body was burned on the
same pile with her husband's.  There was a vast concourse of
various kinds of people at Baldur's obsequies.  First came Odin
accompanied by Frigga, the Valkyrior, and his ravens; then Frey
in his car drawn by Gullinbursti, the boar; Heimdall rode his
horse Gulltopp, and Freya drove in her chariot drawn by cats.
There were also a great many Frost giants and giants of the
mountain present.  Baldur's horse was led to the pile fully
caparisoned and consumed in the same flames with his master.

But Loki did not escape his deserved punishment.  When he saw how
angry the gods were, he fled to the mountain, and there built
himself a hut with four doors, so that he could see every
approaching danger.  He invented a net to catch the fishes, such
as fishermen have used since his time.  But Odin found out his
hiding-place and the gods assembled to take him.  He, seeing
this, changed himself into a salmon, and lay hid among the stones
of the brook.  But the gods took his net and dragged the brook,
and Loki finding he must be caught, tried to leap over the net;
but Thor caught him by the tail and compressed it so, that
salmons every since have had that part remarkably fine and thin.
They bound him with chains and suspended a serpent over his head,
whose venom falls upon his face drop by drop.  His wife Siguna
sits by his side and catches the drops as they fall, in a cup;
but when she carries it away to empty it, the venom falls upon
Loki, which makes him howl with horror, and twist his body about
so violently that the whole earth shakes, and this produces what
men call earthquakes.

THE ELVES

The Edda mentions another class of beings, inferior to the gods,
but still possessed of great power; these were called Elves.  The
white spirits, or Elves of Light, were exceedingly fair, more
brilliant than the sun, and clad in garments of delicate and
transparent texture.  They loved the light, were kindly disposed
to mankind, and generally appeared as fair and lovely children.
Their country was called Alfheim, and was the domain of Freyr,
the god of the sun, in whose light they were always sporting.

The black of Night Elves were a different kind of creatures.
Ugly, long-nosed dwarfs, of a dirty brown color, they appeared
only at night, for they avoided the sun as their most deadly
enemy, because whenever his beams fell upon any of them they
changed them immediately into stones.  Their language was the
echo of solitudes, and their dwelling-places subterranean caves
and clefts.  They were supposed to have come into existence as
maggots, produced by the decaying flesh of Ymir's body, and were
afterwards endowed by the gods with a human form and great
understanding.  They were particularly distinguished for a
knowledge of the mysterious powers of nature, and for the runes
which they carved and explained.  They were the most skilful
artificers of all created beings, and worked in metals and in
wood.  Among their most noted works were Thor's hammer, and the
ship Skidbladnir, which they gave to Freyr, and which was so
large that it could contain all the deities with their war and
household implements, but so skilfully was it wrought that when
folded together it could be put into a side pocket.

RAGNABOK, THE TWILIGHT OF THE GODS

It was a firm belief of the northern nations that a time would
come when all the visible creation, the gods of Valhalla and
Niffleheim, the inhabitants of Jotunheim, Alfheim, and Midgard,
together with their habitations, would be destroyed.  The fearful
day of destruction will not, however, be without its forerunners.
First will come a triple winter, during which snow will fall from
the four corners of the heavens, the frost be very severe, the
wind piercing, the weather tempestuous, and the sun impart no
gladness.  Three such winters will pass away without being
tempered by a single summer.  Three other similar winters will
then follow, during which war and discord will spread over the
universe.  The earth itself will be frightened and begin to
tremble, the sea leave its basin, the heavens tear asunder, and
men perish in great numbers, and the eagles of the air feast upon
their still quivering bodies.  The wolf Fenris will now break his
bands, the Midgard serpent rise out of her bed in the sea, and
Loki, released from his bonds, will join the enemies of the gods.
Amidst the general devastation the sons of Muspelheim will rush
forth under their leader Surtur, before and behind whom are
flames and burning fire.  Onward they ride over Bifrost, the
rainbow bridge, which breaks under the horses' hoofs.  But they,
disregarding its fall, direct their course to the battle-field
called Vigrid.  Thither also repair the wolf Fenris, the Midgard
serpent, Loki with all the followers of Hela, and the Frost
giants.

Heimdall now stands up and sounds the Giallar horn to assemble
the gods and heroes for the contest.  The gods advance, led on by
Odin, who engages the wolf Fenris, but falls a victim to the
monster, who is, however, slain by Vidar, Odin's son.  Thor gains
great renown by killing the Midgard serpent, but recoils and
falls dead, suffocated with the venom which the dying monster
vomits over him.  Loki and Heimdall meet and fight till they are
both slain.  The Gods and their enemies having fallen in battle,
Surtur, who has killed Dreyr, darts fire and flames over the
world, and the whole universe is burned up.  The sun becomes dim,
the earth sinks into the ocean, the stars fall from heaven, and
time is no more.

After this Alfadur (the almighty) will cause a new heaven and a
new earth to arise out of the sea.  The new earth, filled with
abundant supplies, will spontaneously produce its fruits without
labor or care. Wickedness and misery will no more be known, but
the gods and men will live happily together.

RUNIC LETTERS

One cannot travel far in Denmark, Norway, or Sweden, without
meeting with great stones, of different forms, engraven with
characters called Runic, which appear at first sight very
different from all we know.  The letters consist almost
invariably of straight lines, in the shape of little sticks
either singly or put together.  Such sticks were in early times
used by the northern nations for the purpose of ascertaining
future events.  The sticks were shaken up, and from the figures
that they formed a kind of divination was derived.

The Runic characters were of various kinds.  They were chiefly
used for magical purposes.  The noxious, or, as they called them,
the BITTER runes, were employed to bring various evils on their
enemies; the favorable averted misfortune.  Some were medicinal,
others employed to win love, etc.  In later times they were
frequently used for inscriptions, of which more than a thousand
have been found.  The language is a dialect of the Gothic, called
Norse, still in use in Iceland.  The inscriptions may therefore
be read with certainty, but hitherto very few have been found
which throw the least light on history.  They are mostly epitaphs
on tombstones.

Gray's ode on the Descent of Odin contains an allusion to the use
of Runic letters for incantation:

"Facing to the northern clime,
Thrice he traced the Runic rhyme;
Thrice pronounced, in accents dread,
The thrilling verse that wakes the dead,
Till from out the hollow ground
Slowly breathed a sullen sound."

THE SKALDS

The Skalds were the bards and poets of the nation, a very
important class of men in all communities in an early stage of
civilization.  They are the depositaries of whatever historic
lore there is, and it is their office to mingle something of
intellectual gratification with the rude feasts of the warriors,
by rehearsing, with such accompaniments of poetry and music as
their skill can afford, the exploits of their heroes living or
dead.  The compositions of the Skalds were called Sagas, many of
which have come down to us, and contain valuable materials of
history, and a faithful picture of the state of society at the
time to which they relate.

ICELAND

The Eddas and Sagas have come to us from Iceland.  The following
extract from Carlyle's Lectures on Heroes and Hero worship gives
an animated account of the region where the strange stories we
have been reading had their origin.  Let the reader contrast it
for a moment with Greece, the parent of classical mythology.

"In that strange island, Iceland,   burst up, the geologists say,
by fire from the bottom of the sea, a wild land of barrenness and
lava, swallowed many months of every year in black tempests, yet
with a wild, gleaming beauty in summer time, towering up there
stern and grim in the North Ocean, with its snow yokuls
(mountains), roaring geysers (boiling springs), sulphur pools,
and horrid volcanic chasms, like the vast, chaotic battle-field
of Frost and Fire,   where, of all places, we least looked for
literature or written memorials,   the record of these things was
written down.  On the seaboard of this wild land is a rim of
grassy country, where cattle can subsist, and men by means of
them and of what the sea yields; and it seems they were poetic
men these, men who had deep thoughts in them and uttered
musically their thoughts.  Much would be lost had Iceland not
been burst up from the sea, not been discovered by the Northmen!"


Chapter XXXIV
The Druids   Iona

The Druids were the priests or ministers of religion among the
ancient Celtic nations in Gaul, Britain, and Germany.  Our
information respecting them is borrowed from notices in the Greek
and Roman writers, compared with the remains of Welsh and Gaelic
poetry still extant.

The Druids combined the functions of the priest, the magistrate,
the scholar, and the physician.  They stood to the people of the
Celtic tribes in a relation closely analogous to that in which
the Brahmans of India, the Magi of Persia, and the priests of the
Egyptians stood to the people respectively by whom they were
revered.

The Druids taught the existence of one God, to whom they gave a
name "Be'al," which Celtic antiquaries tell us means "the life of
everything," or "the source of all beings,:" and which seems to
have affinity with the Phoenician Baal.  What renders this
affinity more striking is that the Druids as well as the
Phoenicians identified this, their supreme deity, with the Sun.
Fire was regarded as a symbol of the divinity.  The Latin writers
assert that the Druids also worshipped numerous inferior Gods.
They used no images to represent the object of their worship, nor
did they meet in temples or buildings of any kind for the
performance of their sacred rites.  A circle of stones (each
stone generally of vast size) enclosing an area of from twenty
feet to thirty yards in diameter, constituted their sacred place.
The most celebrated of these now remaining is Stonehenge, on
Salisbury Plain, England.

These sacred circles were generally situated near some stream, or
under the shadow of a grove or wide-spreading oak.  In the centre
of the circle stood the Cromlech or altar, which was a large
stone, placed in the manner of a table upon other stones set up
on end.  The Druids had also their high places, which were large
stones or piles of stones on the summits of hills.  These were
called Cairns, and were used in the worship of the deity under
the symbol of the sun.

That the Druids offered sacrifices to their deity there can be no
doubt.  But there is some uncertainty as to what they offered,
and of the ceremonies connected with their religious services we
know almost nothing.  The classical (Roman) writers affirm that
they offered on great occasions human sacrifices; as for success
in war or for relief from dangerous diseases.  Caesar has given a
detailed account of the manner in which this was done.  "They
have images of immense size, the limbs of which are framed with
twisted twigs and filled with living persons.  These being set on
fire, those within are encompassed by the flames."  Many attempts
have been made by Celtic writers to shake the testimony of the
Roman historians to this fact, but without success.

The Druids observed two festivals in each year.  The former took
place in the beginning of May, and was called Beltane or "fire of
God."  On this occasion a large fire was kindled on some elevated
spot, in honor of the sun, whose returning beneficence they thus
welcomed after the gloom and desolation of winter.  Of this
custom a trace remains in the name given to Whitsunday in parts
of Scotland to this day.  Sir Walter Scott uses the word in the
Boat Song in the Lady of the Lake:

"Ours is no sapling, chance-sown by the fountain,
Blooming at Beltane in winter to fade."

The other great festival of the Druids was called "Samh'in," or
"fire of peace," and was held on Hallow-eve (first of November),
which still retains this designation in the Highlands of
Scotland.  On this occasion the Druids assembled in solemn
conclave, in the most central part of the district, to discharge
the judicial functions of their order.  All questions, whether
public or private, all crimes against person or property, were at
this time brought before them for adjudication.  With these
judicial acts were combined certain superstitious usages,
especially the kindling of the sacred fire, from which all the
fires in the district which had been beforehand scrupulously
extinguished, might be relighted.  This usage of kindling fires
on Hallow-eve lingered in the British Islands long after the
establishment of Christianity.

Besides these two great annual festivals, the Druids were in the
habit of observing the full moon, and especially the sixth day of
the moon.  On the latter they sought the mistletoe, which grew on
their favorite oaks, and to which, as well as to the oak itself,
they ascribed a peculiar virtue and sacredness.  The discovery of
it was an occasion of rejoicing and solemn worship.  "They call
it," says Pliny, "by a word in their language which means 'heal-
all,' and having made solemn preparation for feasting and
sacrifice under the tree, they drive thither two milk-white
bulls, whose horns are then for the first time bound.  The priest
then, robed in white, ascends the tree, and cuts off the
mistletoe with a golden sickle.  It is caught in a white mantle,
after which they proceed to slay the victims, at the same time
praying that god would render his gift prosperous to those to
whom he had given it.  They drink the water in which it has been
infused, and think it a remedy for all diseases.  The mistletoe
is a parasitic plant, and is not always nor often found on the
oak, so that when it is found it is the more precious."

The Druids were the teachers of morality as well as of religion.
Of their ethical teaching a valuable specimen is preserved in the
Triads of the Welsh Bards, and from this we may gather that their
views of moral rectitude were on the whole just, and that they
held and inculcated many very noble and valuable principles of
conduct.  They were also the men of science and learning of their
age and people.  Whether they were acquainted with letters or not
has been disputed, though the probability is strong that they
were, to some extent.  But it is certain that they committed
nothing of their doctrine, their history, or their poetry to
writing.  Their teaching was oral, and their literature (if such
a word may be used in such a case) was preserved solely by
tradition.  But the Roman writers admit that "they paid much
attention to the order and laws of nature, and investigated and
taught to the youth under their charge many things concerning the
stars and their motions, the size of the world and the lands ,
and concerning the might and power of the immortal gods."

Their history consisted in traditional tales, in which the heroic
deeds of their forefathers were celebrated.  These were
apparently in verse, and thus constituted part of the poetry as
well as the history of the Druids.  In the poems of Ossian we
have, if not the actual productions of Druidical times, what may
be considered faithful representations of the songs of the Bards.

The Bards were an essential part of the Druidical hierarchy.  One
author, Pennant, says, "The bards were supposed to be endowed
with powers equal to inspiration.  They were the oral historians
of all past transactions, public and private.  They were also
accomplished genealogists."

Pennant gives a minute account of the Eisteddfods or sessions of
the bards and minstrels, which were held in Wales for many
centuries, long after the Druidical priesthood in its other
departments became extinct.  At these meetings none but bards of
merit were suffered to rehearse their pieces, and minstrels of
skill to perform.  Judges were appointed to decide on their
respective abilities, and suitable degrees were conferred.  In
the earlier period the judges were appointed by the Welsh
princes, and after the conquest of Wales, by commission from the
kings of England.  Yet the tradition is that Edward I., in
revenge for the influence of the bards, in animating the
resistance of the people to his sway, persecuted them with great
cruelty.  This tradition has furnished the poet Gray with the
subject of his celebrated ode, the Bard.

There are still occasional meetings of the lovers of Welsh poetry
and music, held under the ancient name.  Among Mrs. Heman's poems
is one written for an Eisteddfod, or meeting of Welsh Bards, held
in London May 22, 1822.  It begins with a description of the
ancient meeting, of which the following lines are a part:

"----- midst the eternal cliffs, whose strength defied
The crested Roman in his hour of pride;
And where the Druid's ancient cromlech frowned,
And the oaks breathed mysterious murmurs round,
There thronged the inspired of yore! On plain or height,
In the sun's face, beneath the eye of light,
And baring unto heaven each noble head,
Stood in the circle, where none else might tread."

The Druidical system was at its height at the time of the Roman
invasion under Julius Caesar.  Against the Druids, as their chief
enemies, these conquerors of the world directed their unsparing
fury.  The Druids, harassed at all points on the main-land,
retreated to Anglesey and Iona, where for a season they found
shelter, and continued their now-dishonored rites.

The Druids retained their predominance in Iona and over the
adjacent islands and main-land until they were supplanted and
their superstitions overturned by the arrival of St. Columba, the
apostle of the Highlands, by whom the inhabitants of that
district were first led to profess Christianity.

IONA

One of the smallest of the British Isles, situated near a ragged
and barren coast, surrounded by dangerous seas, and possessing no
sources of internal wealth, Iona has obtained an imperishable
place in history as the seat of civilization and religion at a
time when the darkness of heathenism hung over almost the whole
of Northern Europe.  Iona or Icolmkill is situated at the
extremity of the island of Mull, from which it is separated by a
strait of half a mile in breadth, its distance from the main-land
of Scotland being thirty-six miles.

Columba was a native of Ireland, and connected by birth with the
princes of the land.  Ireland was at that time a land of gospel
light, while the western and northern parts of Scotland were
still immersed in the darkness of heathenism.  Columba, with
twelve friends landed on the island of Iona in the year of our
Lord 563, having made the passage in a wicker boat covered with
hides.  The Druids who occupied the island endeavored to prevent
his settling there, and the savage nations on the adjoining
shores incommoded him with their hostility, and on several
occasions endangered his life by their attacks.  Yet by his
perseverance and zeal he surmounted all opposition, procured from
the king a gift of the island, and established there a monastery
of which he was the abbot.  He was unwearied in his labors to
disseminate a knowledge of the Scriptures throughout the
Highlands and Islands of Scotland, and such was the reverence
paid him that though not a bishop, but merely a presbyter and
monk, the entire province with its bishops was subject to him and
his successors.  The Pictish monarch was so impressed with a
sense of his wisdom and worth that he held him in the highest
honor, and the neighboring chiefs and princes sought his counsel
and availed themselves of his judgment in settling their
disputes.

When Columba landed on Iona he was attended by twelve followers
whom he had formed into a religious body, of which he was the
head.  To these, as occasion required, others were from time to
time added, so that the original number was always kept up.
Their institution was called a monastery, and the superior an
abbot, but the system had little in common with the monastic
institutions of later times.  The name by which those who
submitted to the rule were known was that of Culdees, probably
from the Latin "cultores Dei"   worshippers of God.  They were a
body of religious persons associated together for the purpose of
aiding each other in the common work of preaching the gospel and
teaching youth, as well as maintaining in themselves the fervor
of devotion by united exercises of worship.  On entering the
order certain vows were taken by the members, but they were not
those which were usually imposed by monastic orders, for of
these, which are three, celibacy, poverty, and obedience, the
Culdees were bound to none except the third.  To poverty they did
not bind themselves; on the contrary, they seem to have labored
diligently to procure for themselves and those dependent on them
the comforts of life.  Marriage also was allowed them, and most
of them seem to have entered into that state.  True, their wives
were not permitted to reside with them at the institution, but
they had a residence assigned to them in an adjacent locality.
Near Iona there is an island which still bears the name of "Eilen
nam ban," women's island, where their husbands seem to have
resided with them, except when duty required their presence in
the school or the sanctuary.

Campbell, in his poem of Reullura, alludes to the married monks
of Iona:

" -----The pure Culdees
Were Albyn's earliest priests of God,
Ere yet an island of her seas
By foot of Saxon monk was trod,
Long ere her churchmen by bigotry
Were barred from holy wedlock's tie.
'Twas then that Aodh, famed afar,
In Iona preached the word with power.
And Reullura, beauty's star,
Was the partner of his bower."

In one of his Irish Melodies, Moore gives the legend of St.
Senanus and the lady who sought shelter on the island, but was
repulsed:

"Oh, haste and leave this sacred isle,
Unholy bark, ere morning smile;
For on thy deck, though dark it be,
A female form I see;
And I have sworn this sainted sod
Shall ne'er by woman's foot be trod.

In these respects and in others the Culdees departed from the
established rules of the Romish Church, and consequently were
deemed heretical.  The consequence was that as the power of the
latter advanced, that of the Culdees was enfeebled.  It was not,
however, till the thirteenth century that the communities of the
Culdees were suppressed and the members dispersed.  They still
continued to labor as individuals, and resisted the inroads of
Papa usurpation as they best might till the light of the
Reformation dawned on the world.

Ionia, from its position in the western seas, was exposed to the
assaults of the Norwegian and Danish rovers by whom those seas
were infested, and by them it was repeatedly pillaged, its
dwellings burned, and its peaceful inhabitants put to the sword.
These unfavorable circumstances led to its gradual decline, which
was expedited by the supervision of the Culdees throughout
Scotland.  Under the reign of Popery the island became the seat
of a nunnery, the ruins of which are still seen.  At the
Reformation, the nuns were allowed to remain, living in
community, when the abbey was dismantled.

Ionia is now chiefly resorted to by travellers on account of the
numerous ecclesiastical and sepulchral remains which are found
upon it.  The principal of these are the Cathedral or Abbey
Church, and the Chapel of the Nunnery.  Besides these remains of
ecclesiastical antiquity, there are some of an earlier date, and
pointing to the existence on the island of forms of worship and
belief different from those of Christianity.  These are the
circular Cairns which are found in various parts, and which seem
to have been of Druidical origin.  It is in reference to all
these remains of ancient religion that Johnson exclaims, "That
man is little to be envied whose patriotism would not gain force
upon the plains of Marathon, or whose piety would not grow warmer
amid the ruins of Iona."

In the Lord of the Isles, Scott beautifully contrasts the church
on Iona with the Cave of Staffa, opposite:

"Nature herself, it seemed, would raise
A minister to her Maker's praise!
Not for a meaner use ascend
Her columns or her arches bend;
Nor of a theme less solemn tells
The mighty surge that ebbs and swells,
And still between each awful pause,
>From the high vault an answer draws,
In varied tone, prolonged and high,
That mocks the organ's melody;
Nor doth its entrance front in vain
To old Iona's holy fane,
That Nature's voice might seem to say,
Well hast thou done, frail child of clay,
Thy humble powers that stately shrine
Tasked high and hard   but witness mine."


SKETCH OF THE HISTORY OF GREEK SCULPTURE

We have seen throughout the course of this book how the Greek and
Norse myths have furnished material for the poets, not only of
Greece and Scandinavia, but also of modern times.  In the same
way these stories have been found capable of artistic treatment
by painters, sculptors, and even by musicians.  The story of
Cupid and Psyche has not only been retold by poets from Apuleius
to William Morris, but also drawn out in a series of frescoes by
Raphael, and sculptured in marble by Canova.  Even to enumerate
the works of art of the modern and ancient world which depend for
their subject-matter upon mythology would be a task for a book by
itself.  As we have been able to give only a few illustrations of
the poetic treatment of some of the principal myths, so we shall
have to content ourselves with a similarly limited view of the
part played by them in other fields of art.

Of the statues made by the ancients themselves to represent their
greater deities, a few have been already commented on.  But it
must not be thought that these splendid examples of plastic art,
the Olympian Jupiter and the Athene of the Parthenon, represent
the earliest attempts of the Greeks to give form to their myths
in sculpture.  Our most primitive sources of knowledge of much of
Greek mythology are the Homeric poems, where the stories of
Achilles and Ulysses have already taken on a poetic form, almost
the highest conceivable.  But in the other arts, Greek genius
lagged behind.  At the time when the Homeric poems were written,
we find no traces of columned temples or magnificent statues.
Scarcely were the domestic arts sufficiently advanced to allow
the poet to describe dwellings glorious enough for his heroes to
live in, or articles of common utility fit for their use.  Of the
two most famous works of art mentioned in the Iliad we must think
of the statue of Athene at Troy (the Palladium) as a rude carving
perhaps of wood, the arms of the goddess separated from the body
only enough to allow her to hold the lance and spindle, which
were the signs of her divinity.  The splendor of the shield of
Achilles must be attributed largely to the rich imagination of
the poet.

Other works of art of this primitive age we know from
descriptions in later classical writers.  They attributed the
rude statues which had come down to them to Daedalus and his
pupils, and beheld them with wonder at their uncouth ugliness.
It was long thought that these beginnings of Greek sculpture were
to be traced to Egypt, but now-a-days scholars are inclined to
take a different view.  Egyptian sculpture was closely allied to
architecture; the statues were frequently used for the columns of
temples.  Thus sculpture was subordinated to purely mechanical
principles, and human figures were represented altogether in
accordance with established conventions.  Greek sculpture, on the
contrary, even in its primitive forms was eminently natural,
capable of developing a high degree of realism.  From the first
it was decorative in character, and this left the artist free to
execute in his own way, provided only that the result should be
in accordance with the highest type of beauty which he could
conceive.  An example of this early decorative art was the chest
of Kypselos, on which stories from Homer were depicted in
successive bands, the reliefs being partly inlaid with gold and
ivory.

>From the sixth century before Christ date three processes of
great importance in the development of sculpture; the art of
casting in bronze, the chiselling of marble, and the inlaying of
gold and ivory on wood (chryselephantine work).  As early Greek
literature developed first among the island Greeks, so the
invention of these three methods of art must br attributed to the
colonists away from the original Hellas.  To the Samians is
probably due the invention of bronze casting, to the Chians the
beginning of sculpture in marble.  This latter development opened
to Greek sculpture its great future.  Marble work was carried on
by a race of artists beginning with Melas in the seventh century
and coming down to Boupalos and Athenis, the sons of Achermos,
whose works survived to the time of Augustus.  Chryselephantine
sculpture began in Crete.

Among the earliest of the Greek sculptors whose names have come
down to us was Canachos, the Sicyonian.  His masterpiece was the
Apollo Philesios, in bronze, made for the temple of Didymas.  The
statue no longer exists, but there are a number of ancient
monuments which may be taken as fairly close copies of it, or at
least as strongly suggestive of the style of Canachos, among
which are the Payne-Knight Apollo at the British Museum, and the
Piombino Apollo at the Louvre.  In this latter statue the god
stands erect with the left foot slightly advanced, and the hands
outstretched.  The socket of the eye is hollow and was probably
filled with some bright substance.  Canachos was undoubtedly an
innovator, and in the stronger modelling of the head and neck,
the more vigorous posture of the body of his statue, he shows an
advance on the more conventional and limited art of his
generation.

As Greek sculpture progressed, schools of artists arose in
various cities, dependent usually for their fame on the ability
of some individual sculptor.  "Among these schools, those of
Aegina and Athens are the most important.  Of the former school
the works of Onatus are by far the most notable.

Onatus was a contemporary of Canachos, and reached the height of
his fame in the middle of the fifth century before Christ.  His
most famous work was the scene where the Greek heroes draw lots
for an opponent to Hector.  It is not certain whether Onatus
sculptured the groups which adorned the pediments of the temple
of Athena at Aegina, groups now in the Glyptothek at Munich, but
certainly these famous statues are decidedly in his style.  Both
pediments represent the battle over the body of Patroclus.  The
east pediment shows the struggle between Heracles and Laomedon.
In each group a fallen warrior lies at the feet of the goddess,
over whom she extends her protection.  The Aeginetan marbles show
the traces of dying archaism.  The figures of the warriors are
strongly moulded, muscular, but without grace.  The same type is
reproduced again and again among them.  Even the wounded scarcely
depart from it.  The statues of the eastern pediment are probably
later in date than those of the western, and in the former the
dying warrior exhibits actual weakness and pain.  In the western
pediment the statue of the goddess is thoroughly archaic, stiff,
uncompromisingly harsh, the features frozen into a conventional
smile.  In the eastern group the goddess, though still
ungraceful, is more distinctly in action, and seems about to take
part in the struggle.  The Heracles of the eastern pediment, a
warrior supported on one knee and drawing his bow, is, for the
time, wonderfully vivid and strong.  All of these statues are
evidence of the rapid progress which Greek sculpture was making
in the fifth century against the demands of hieratic
conventionality.

The contemporary Athenian school boasted the names of Hegias,
Critios, and Nesiotes. Their works have all perished, but a copy
of one of the most famous works of Critios and Nesiotes, the
statue of the Tyrannicides, is to be found in the Museum of
Naples.  Harmodius and Aristogeiton killed, in 514 B.C., the
tyrant-ruler of Athens, Hipparchus.  In consequence of this
Athens soon became a republic, and the names of the first rebels
were held in great honor.  Their statues were set up on the
Acropolis, first a group by Antenor, then the group in question
by Critios and Nesiotes after the first had been carried away by
Xerxes.  The heroes, as we learn from the copies in Naples, were
represented as rushing forward, one with a naked sword flashing
above his head, the other with a mantle for defence thrown over
his left arm.  They differ in every detail of action and pose,
yet they exemplify the same emotion, a common impulse to perform
the same deed.

At Argus, contemporary with these early schools of Athens and
Aegina, was a school of artists depending on the fame of the
great sculptor Ageladas.  He was distinguished for his statues in
bronze of Zeus and Heracles, but his great distinction is not
through works of his own, but is due to the fact that he was the
teacher of Myron, Polycleitos, and Pheidias.  These names with
those of Pythagoras and Calamis bring us to the glorious
flowering time of Greek sculpture.

Calamis, somewhat older than the others, was an Athenian, at
least by residence.  He carried on the measure of perfection
which Athenian sculpture had already attained, and added grace
and charm to the already powerful model which earlier workers had
left him.  None of his works survive, but from notices of critics
we know that he excelled especially in modelling horses and other
animals.  His two race-horses in memory of the victory of Hiero
of Syracuse at Olympia in 468 were considered unsurpassable.
However, it is related that Praxiteles removed the charioteer
from one of the groups of Calamis and replaced it by one of his
own statues "that the men of Calamis might not be inferior to his
horses."  Thus it would appear that Calamis was less successful
in dealing with the human body, though a statue of Aphrodite from
his hand was proverbial, under the name Sosandra, for its grace
and grave beauty.

Pythagoras of Rhegium carried on the realism, truth to nature,
which was beginning to appear as an ideal of artistic
representation.  He is said to have been the first sculptor to
mark the veins and sinews on the body.

In this vivid naturalness Pythagoras was himself far surpassed by
Myron.  Pythagoras had seen the importance of showing the effect
of action in every portion of the body.  Myron carried the
minuteness of representation so far that his Statue of Ladas, the
runner, was spoken of not as a runner, but as a BREATHER.  This
statue represented the victor of the foot-race falling,
overstrained and dying, at the goal, the last breath from the
tired lungs yet hovering upon the lips.  More famous than the
Ladas is the Discobolos , or disc-thrower, of which copies exist
at Rome, one being at the Vatican, the other at the Palazzo
Massimi alle Colonne.  These, though doubtless far behind the
original, serve to show the marvellous power of portraying
intense action which the sculptor possessed.  The athlete is
represented at the precise instant when he has brought the
greatest possible bodily strength into play in order to give to
the disc its highest force.  The body is bent forward, the toes
of one foot cling to the ground, the muscles of the torso are
strained, the whole body is in an attitude of violent tension
which can endure only for an instant.  Yet the face is free from
contortion, free from any trace of effort, calm and beautiful.
This shows that Myron, intent as he was upon reproducing nature,
could yet depart from his realistic formulae when the
requirements of beautiful art demanded it.

The same delight in rapid momentary action which characterized
the two statues of Myron already mentioned appears in a third,
the statue of Marsyas astonished at the flute which Athene had
thrown away, and which was to lead its finder into his fatal
contest with Apollo.  A copy of this work at the Lateran Museum
represents the satyr starting back in a rapid mingling of desire
and fear, which is stamped on his heavy face, as well as
indicated in the movement of his body.

Myron's realism again found expression in the bronze cow,
celebrated by the epigrams of contemporary poets for its striking
naturalness.  "Shepherd, pasture thy flock at a little distance,
lest thinking thou seest the cow of Myron breathe, thou shouldst
wish to lead it away with thine oxen," was one of them.

The value and originality of Myron's contributions to the
progress of Greek sculpture were so great that he left behind him
a considerable number of artists devoted to his methods.  His son
Lykios followed his father closely.  In statues on the Acropolis
representing two boys, one bearing a basin, one blowing the coals
in a censer into a flame, he reminds one of the Ladas, especially
in the second, where the action of breathing is exemplified in
every movement of the body.  Another famous work by a follower of
Myron was the boy plucking a thorn from his foot, a copy of which
is in the Rothschild collection.

     The frieze of the Temple of Apollo at Phigales has also been
attributed to the school of Myron.  The remnants of this frieze,
now in the British Museum, show the battle of the Centaurs and
Amazons.  The figures have not the calm stateliness of bearing
which characterizes those of the Parthenon frieze, but instead
exhibit a wild vehemence of action which is, perhaps, directly
due to the influence of Myron.

Another pupil of Ageladas, a somewhat younger contemporary of
Pheidias, was Polycleitos.  He excelled in representations of
human, bodily beauty.  Perfection of form was his aim, and so
nearly did he seem to the ancients to have attained this object
that his Doryphoros was taken by them as a model of the human
figure.   A copy of this statue exists in the Museum of Naples
and represents a youth in the attitude of bearing a lance, quiet
and reserved.  The figure is rather heavily built, firm,
powerful, and yet graceful, though hardly light enough to justify
the praise of perfection which has been lavished upon it.

A companion statue to the Doryphorus of Polycleitos was his
statue of the Diadumenos, or boy binding his head with a fillet.
A supposed copy of this exists in the British Museum.  It
presents the same general characteristics as the Doryphorus, a
well-modelled but thick-set figure standing in an attitude of
repose.

What Polycleitos did for the male form in these two statues he
did for the female form in his Amazon, which, according to a
doubtful story, was adjudged in competition superior to a work by
Pheidias.  A statue supposed to be a copy of this masterpiece of
Polycleitos is now in the Berlin Museum.  It represents a woman
standing in a graceful attitude beside a pillar, her left arm
thrown above her head to free her wounded breast.  The sculptor
has succeeded admirably in catching the muscular force and firm
hard flesh beneath the graceful curves of the woman warrior.

Polycleitos won his chief successes in portraying human figures.
His statues of divinities are not numerous: a Zeus at Argos, an
Aphrodite at Amyclae, and, more famous than either, the
chryselephantine Hera for a temple between Argos and Mycenae.
The goddess was represented as seated on a throne of gold, with
bare head and arms.  In her right hand was the sceptre crowned
with the cuckoo, symbol of conjugal fidelity; in her left, the
pomegranate.  There exists no certain copy of the Hera of
Polycleitos.  The head of Hera in Naples may, perhaps, give us
some idea of the type of divine beauty preferred by the sculptor
who was preeminent for his devotion to human beauty.

Polycleitos was much praised by the Romans Quintilian and Cicero,
who nevertheless, held that though he surpassed the beauty of man
in nature, yet he did not approach the beauty of the gods.  It
was reserved for Pheidias to portray the highest conceptions of
divinity of which the Greek mind was capable in his statues of
Athene in the Parthenon at Athens, and the Zeus of Olympus.

Pheidias lived in the golden age of Athenian art.  The victory of
Greece against Persia had been due in large measure to Athens,
and the results of the political success fell largely to her.  It
is true the Persians had held the ground of Athens for weeks, and
when, after the victory of Salamis, the people returned to their
city, they found it in ruins.  But the spirit of the Athenians
had been stirred, and in spite of the hostility of Persia, the
jealousy of neighboring states, and the ruin of the city, the
people felt new confidence in themselves and their divinity, and
were more than ever ready to strive for the leadership of Greece.
Religious feeling, gratitude to the gods who had preserved them,
and civic pride in the glory of their own victorious city, all
inspired the Athenians.  After the winter in which the Persians
were finally beaten at Plataea, the Athenians began to rebuild.
For a while their efforts were confined to rendering the city
habitable and defensible, since the activity of the little state
was largely political.  But when th leadership of Athens in
Greece had become firmly established under Theistocles and Cimon,
the third president of the democracy, Pericles, found leisure to
turn to the artistic development of the city.  The time was ripe,
for the artistic progress of the people had been no less marked
than their political.  The same long training in valor and
temperance which gave Athens her statesmen, Aristides and
Pericles, gave her her artists and poets also.  Pericles became
president of the city in 444 B.C., just at the time when the
decorative arts were approaching perfection under Pheidias.

Pheidias was an Athenian by birth, the son of Charmides.  He
studied first under Hegias, then under Ageladas the Argive.  He
became the most famous sculptor of his time, and when Pericles
wanted a director for his great monumental works at Athens, he
summoned Pheidias.  Artists from all over Hellas put themselves
at his disposal, and under his direction the Parthenon was built
and adorned with the most splendid statuary the world has ever
known.

The Parthenon was fashioned in honor of Athene or Minerva, the
guardian deity of Athens, the preserver of Hellas, whom the
Athenians in their gratitude sought to make the sovereign goddess
of the land which she had saved.  The eastern gable of the temple
was adorned with a group representing the appearance of Minerva
before the gods of Olympus.  In the left angle of the gable
appeared Helios, the dawn, rising from the sea.  In the right
angle Selene, evening, sank from sight.  Next to Helios was a
figure representing either Dionysus or Olympus, and beside were
seated two figures, perhaps Persephone and Demeter, perhaps two
Horae.  Approaching these as a messenger was Iris.  Balancing
these figures on the side next Selene were two figures,
representing Aphrodite in the arms of Peitho, or perhaps
Thalassa, goddess of the sea, leaning against Gaia, the earth.
Nearer the centre on this side was Hestia, to whom Hermes brought
the tidings.  The central group is totally lost, but must have
been made up of Zeus, Athene, and Vulcan, with, perhaps, others
of the greater divinities.

The group of the western pediment represented Athene and
Poseidon, contesting for the supremacy of Athens.  Athene's
chariot is driven by Victory, Poseidon's by Amphitrite.  Although
the greater part of the attendant deities have disappeared, we
know the gods of the rivers of Athens, Eridanas and Ilissos, in
reclining postures filled the corners of the pediment.  One of
these has survived, and remains in its perfection of grace and
immortal beauty to attest the wonderful skill that directed the
chiselling of the whole group.

Although the gable groups have suffered terribly in the historic
vicissitudes of the Parthenon, still enough remains of them to
show the dignity of their conception, the rhythm of composition,
and the splendid freedom of their workmanship.  The fragments
were purchased by Lord Elgin early in this century and are now in
the British Museum.

The frieze of the Parthenon, executed under the supervision of
Pheidias, represented one of the most glorious religious
ceremonies of the Greek, the Pan-Athenaic procession.  The
deities surround Zeus as spectators of the scene, and toward them
winds the long line of virgins bearing incense, herds of animals
for sacrifice, players upon the lute and lyre, chariots and
riders.  On the western front the movement has not yet begun, and
the youths and men stand in disorder, some binding their mantles,
some mounting their horses.  The frieze is noteworthy for its
expression of physical and intellectual beauty which marked the
highest conceptions of Greek art, and for the studied mingling of
forcible action and gracious repose.  The larger part of this
frieze has been preserved and is to be seen at the British
Museum.

The third group of Parthenon sculptures, the ornaments of the
metope, represents the contest between centaurs and the Lapithae
with some scenes interspersed of which the subjects cannot now be
determined.  The frieze is in low relief, the figures scarcely
starting from the background.  The sculptures of the metope, on
the contrary, are in high relief, frequently giving the
impression of marbles detached from the background altogether.
They were, moreover, colored.  Or course, Pheidias himself cannot
have had more than the share of general director in the
sculptures of the metope; many of them are manifestly executed by
inferior hands.  Nevertheless, the mind of a great designer is
evident in the wonderful variety of posture and action which the
figures show.  Indeed, when we consider the immense number of
figures employed, it becomes evident that not even all the
sculptures of the pediments can have been executed entirely by
Pheidias, who was already probably well advanced in life when he
began the Parthenon decorations; yet all the sculptures were the
work of Pheidias or of pupils working under him, and although
traces may be found of the influence of other artists,   of
Myron, for example, in the freedom and naturalness of the action
in the figures of the frieze,   yet all the decorations of the
Parthenon may fairly be said to belong to the Pheidian school of
sculpture.

The fame of Pheidias himself, however, rested very largely on
three great pieces of art work: The Athene Promachos, the Athene
Parthenos, and the Olympian Zeus.  The first of these was a work
of Pheidias's youth.  It represented the goddess standing gazing
toward Athens lovingly and protectingly.  She held a spear in one
hand, the other supported a buckler.  The statue was nine feet
high.  It was dignified and noble, but at the time of its
conception Pheidias had not freed himself from the convention and
traditions of the earlier school, and the stiff folds of the
tunic, the cold demeanor of the goddess, recall the masters whom
Pheidias was destined to supersede.  No copy of this statue
survives, and hence a description of it must be largely
conjectural, made up from hints gleaned from Athenian coins.

Pheidias sculptured other statues of Athene, but none so
wonderful as the Athene Parthenos, which, with the Olympian Zeus,
was the wonder and admiration of the Greek world.  The Athene
Parthenos was designed to stand as an outward symbol of the
divinity in whose protecting might the city had conquered and
grown strong, in whose honor the temple had been built in which
this statue was to shine as queen.  The Olympian Zeus was the
representative of that greater divinity which all Hellas united
in honoring.  We may gain from the words of Pausanias some idea
of the magnificence of this statue, but of its unutterable
majesty we can only form faint images in the mind, remembering
the strength and grace of the figures of the pediments of the
temple at Athens.  "Zeus," says Pausanias, "is seated on a throne
of ivory and gold; upon his head is laced a garland made in
imitation of olive leaves.  He bears a Victory in his right hand,
also crowned and made in gold and ivory, and holding in her right
hand a little fillet.  In his left hand the god holds a sceptre,
made of all kinds of metals; the bird perched on the tip of the
sceptre is an eagle.  The shoes of Zeus are also of gold, and of
gold his mantle, and underneath this mantle are figures and
lilies inlaid."

Both the Olympian Zeus and the Athene were of chryselephantine
work offering enormous technical difficulties, but in spite of
this both showed almost absolute perfection of form united with
beauty of intellectual character to represent the godhead
incarnate in human substance.  These two statues may be taken as
the noblest creations of the Greek imagination when directed to
the highest objects of its contemplation.  The beauty of the
Olympian Zeus, according to Quintilian, "added a new element to
religion."

In the works of art just mentioned the creative force of the
Greeks attained its highest success.  After the death of Pheidias
his methods were carried on in a way by the sculptors who had
worked under him and become subject to his influence; but as
years went on, with less and less to remind us of the supreme
perfection of the master.  Among these pupils of Pheidias were
Agoracritos and Colotes in Athens, Paionios, and Alcamenes.  Of
Paionios fortunately one statue survives in regard to which there
can be no doubt.  The Victory erected to the Olympian Zeus shows
a tall goddess, strongly yet gracefully carved, posed forward
with her drapery flattened closely against her body in front as
if by the wind, and streaming freely behind.  The masterpiece of
Alcamenes, an Aphrodite, is known only by descriptions.   The
pediments of the temple at Olympia have been assigned, by
tradition, one to Alcamenes, one to Paionios.  They are, however,
so thoroughly archaic in style that it seems impossible to
reconcile them with what we know of the work of the men to whom
they are attributed.   The group of the eastern front represented
the chariot races of Oinomaos and Pelops; that of the western,
the struggle of the Centaurs and Lapithae.  In the latter the
action is extremely violent, only the Apollo in the midst is calm
and commanding.  In both pediments there are decided approaches
to realism.

In Athens, after Pheidias, the greatest sculptures were those
used to adorn the Erechtheion.  The group of Caryatids, maidens
who stand erect and firm, bearing upon their heads the weight of
the porch, is justly celebrated as an architectural device.  At
the same time, the maidens, though thus performing the work of
columns, do not lose the grace and charm which naturally belongs
to them.

Another post-Pheidian work at Athens was the temple of Nike
Apteros, the wingless Victory.  The bas-reliefs from this temple,
now in the Acropolis Museum at Athens, one representing the
Victory stooping to tie her sandal, another, the Victory crowning
a trophy, recall the consummate grace of the art of Pheidias, the
greatest Greek art.

Agoracritos left behind him works at Athens which in their
perfection could scarcely be distinguished from the works of
Pheidias himself, none of which have come down to us.  But from
the time of the Peloponnesian war, the seeds of decay were in the
art of Hellas, and they ripened fast.  In one direction
Callimachus carried refined delicacy and formal perfection to
excess; and in the other Demetrios, the portrait sculptor, put by
ideal beauty for the striking characteristics of realism.  Thus
the strict reserve, the earnest simplicity of Pheidias and his
contemporaries, were sacrificed   sacrificed partly, it is true,
to the requirements of a fuller spiritual life, partly to the
demands of a wider knowledge and deeper passion.  The legitimate
effects of sculpture are strictly limited.  Sculpture is fitted
to express not temporary, accidental feeling, but permanent
character; not violent action, but repose.  In the great work of
the golden age the thought of the artist was happily limited so
that the form was adequate to its expression.  One single motive
was all that he tried to express   a motive uncomplicated by
details of specific situation, a type of general beauty unmixed
with the peculiar suggestions of special and individual emotion.
When the onward impulse led the artist to pass over the severe
limits which bounded the thought of the earlier school, he found
his medium becoming less adequate to the demands of his more
detailed and circumstantial mental conception.  The later
sculpture, therefore, lacks in some measure the repose and entire
assurance of the earlier.  The earlier sculpture confines itself
to broad, central lines of heroic and divine character, as in the
two masterpieces of Pheidias.  The latter dealt in great
elaboration with the details and elements of the stories and
characters that formed its subjects, as in the Niobe group, or
the Laocoon, to be mentioned later.

These modern tendencies produced as the greatest artists of the
later Greek type Scopas and Praxiteles.

Between these, however, and the earlier school which they
superseded came the Athenian Kephisodotos, the father, it may be
supposed of Praxiteles.  His fame rests upon a single work, a
copy of which has been discovered, the Eirene and Ploutos.  In
this, while the simplicity and strictness of the Pheidian ideal
have been largely preserved, it has been used as the vehicle of
deeper feeling and more spiritual life.

Scopas was born at Paros, and lived during the fist half of the
fourth century.  He did much decorative work including the
pediments of the temple of Athena at Tegea.  He participated also
in the decoration of the Mausoleum erected by Artemisia to the
memory of her husband.  In this latter, the battle of the
Amazons, though probably not the work of Scopas himself, shows in
the violence of its attitudes and the pathos of its action the
new elements of interest in Greek art with the introduction of
which Scopas is connected.  The fame of Scopas rests principally
on the Niobe group which is attributed to him.  The sculpture
represents the wife of Amphion at the moment when the curse of
Apollo and Diana falls upon her, and her children are slain
before her eyes.  The children, already feeling the arrows of the
gods, are flying to her for protection.  She tries in vain to
shield her youngest born beneath her mantle, and turns as if to
hide her face with its motherly pride just giving place to
despair and agony.  The whole group is free from contortion and
grandly tragic.  The original exists no longer, but copies of
parts of the group are found in the Uffizi Gallery at Florence.

The Niobe group shows the distinction between Scopas and
Praxiteles and the earlier artists in choice of subject and mode
of treatment.  The same distinction is shown by the Raging
Bacchante of Scopas.  The head is thrown back, the hair loosened,
the garments floating in the wind,   an ecstacy of wild, torrent-
like action.

Of the work of Praxiteles we know more directly than of the work
of any other Greek sculptor of the same remoteness, for one
statue has come down to us actually from the master's own hand,
and we possess good copies of several others.  His statues of
Aphrodite, of which there were at least five, are known to us by
the figures on coins and by two works in the same style, the
Aphrodite in the Glyptothek, and that of the Vatican.  The most
famous of all was the Aphrodite of Cnidos, which was ranked with
the Olympian Zeus and was called one of the wonders of te world.
King Nicomedes of Bithynia offered vainly to the people of Cnidos
the entire amount of their state debt for its possession.  Lucian
described the goddess as having a smile somewhat proud and
disdainful; yet the eyes, moist and kindly, glowed with
tenderness and passion, and the graceful lines of the shoulders,
the voluptuous curves of the thighs, are full of sensuous
feeling.  The goddess, as represented in coins, stood beside a
vase, over which her drapery is falling, while with her right
hand she shields herself modestly.  The head of Aphrodite in the
British Museum, with its pure brows, its delicate, voluptuous
lips, and sweet, soft skin, is, perhaps, the nearest approach
which we possess to the glorious beauty of the original.

Other Aphrodites, the draped statue of Cos among them, and
several statues of Eros, representing tender, effeminate youths,
illustrate further the departure which Praxiteles marks from the
restraint of Pheidias.  Another of his masculine figures is the
graceful Apollo with the Lizard.  The god, strong in his youthful
suppleness, is leaning against a tree threatening with his darts
a small lizard which is seeking to climb up.  Still another type
of masculine grace left us by Praxiteles is his statue of the
Satyr, of which a copy exists in the Capitoline Museum.  The
Satyr, in the hands of Praxiteles, lost all his ancient
uncouthness, and became a strong, graceful youth, with soft, full
form.  In the Capitoline representation the boy is leaning easily
against a tree, throwing his body into the most indolent posture,
which brings out the soft, feminine curves of hips and legs.  In
fact, so thoroughly is the feminine principle worked into the
statues of the Apollo, the Eros, and the Satyr, that this
characteristic became considered typical of Praxiteles, and when,
in 1877, was discovered the one authentic work which we possess
of this artist, the great Hermes of Olympia, critics were at a
loss to reconcile this figure with what was already known of the
sculptor's work, some holding that it must be a work of his
youth, when, through his father, Kephisodotos, he felt the force
of the Pheidian tradition, others that there must have been two
sculptors bearing the great name of Praxiteles.

The Hermes was found lacking the right arm and both legs below
the knees, but the marvellous head and torso are perfectly
preserved.  The god is without the traditional symbols of his
divinity.  He is merely a beautiful man.  He stands leaning
easily against a tree, supporting on one arm the child Dionysus,
to whom he turns his gracious head with the devotion and love of
a protector.  The face, in its expression of sweet majesty, is
distinctly a personal conception.  The low forehead, the eyes far
apart, the small, playful mouth, the round, dimpled chin, all
bear evidence to the individual quality which Praxiteles infused
into the ideal thought of the god.  The body, though at rest, is
instinct with life and activity, in spite of its grace.  In
short, the form of the god has the superb perfection, as the face
has the dignity, which was attributed to Pheidias.  Nevertheless,
the Hermes illustrates sensual loveliness of the later school.
The freedom with which the god is conceived belongs to an age
when the chains of religious belief sat lightly upon the artist.
The gds of Praxiteles are the gods of human experience, and in
his treatment of them he does not always escape the tendency of
the age of decline to put pathos and passion in the place of
eternal majesty.

The influence of Scopas and Praxiteles continued to be felt
through a number of artists who worked in sufficient harmony with
them to be properly called of their school.  To one of these
followers of Praxiteles, some say as a copy of a work of the
master himself, we must attribute the Demeter now in the British
Museum.  This is  a pathetic illustration of suffering
motherhood.  There is no exaggeration in the grief, only the calm
dignity of a sorrow which in spite of hope refuses to be
comforted.

Another work of an unknown artist, probably a follower of Scopas,
is the splendid Victory of Samothrace, now in the Louvre.  The
goddess, with her great wings outspread behind her, is being
carried forward, her firm rounded limbs striking through the
draperies which flutter behind her, and fall about her in soft
folds.  Vigorous and stately, the goddess poises herself on the
prow of the ship, swaying with the impulse of conquering daring
and strength.

Another statue which belongs, so far as artistic reasoning may
carry us, to the period and school of Praxiteles, is the so-
called Venus of Milo.  The proper title to be given to this
statue is doubtful, for the drapery corresponds to that of the
Roman type of Victory, and if we could be sure that the goddess
once held the shield of conquest in her now broken arms we should
be forced to call the figure a Victory and place its date no
earlier than the second century B.C.  However this may be, the
statue is justly one of the most famous in the world.  It
represents an ideal of purity and sweetness.  There is not a
trace of coarseness or immodesty in the half-naked woman who
stands perfect in the maidenly dignity of her own conquering
fairness.  Her serious yet smiling face, her graceful form, the
delicacy of feeling in attitude and gaze, the tender moulding of
breast and limbs, make it a worthy companion of the Hermes or
Praxiteles.  It seems scarcely possible that it should not have
sprung from the inspiration of his example.

The last of the great sculptors of Greece was Lysippos of Sikyou.
He differed from Pheidias on the one hand and from Polycleitos on
the other.  Pheidias strove to make his gods all god-like;
Lysippos was content to represent them merely as exaggerated
human beings; but therein he differed also from Polycleitos, who
aimed to model the human body with the beauty only which actually
existed in it.  Lysippos felt that he must set the standard of
human perfection higher than it appears in the average of human
examples.  Hence we have from him the statues of Heracles, in
which the ideal of manly strength was carried far beyond the
range of human possibility.  A reminiscence of this conception of
Lysippos may be found in the Farnese Heracles of Glycon, now in
the Museum of Naples.  Lysippos also sculptured four statues of
Zeus, which depended for their interest largely on their heroic
size.

Lysippos won much fame by his statues of Alexander the Great, but
he is chiefly known to us by his statue of the athlete scraping
himself with a strigil, of which an authentic copy is in the
Vatican.  The figure differs decidedly from the thick-set, rather
heavy figures of Polycleitos, being tall, and slender in spite of
its robustness.  The head is small, the torso is small at the
waist, but strong, and the whole body is splendidly active.

The changes in the models of earlier sculptors made by Lysippos
were of sufficient importance to give rise to a school which was
carried on by his sons and others, producing among many famous
works the Barberini Faun, now at the Glyptothek, Munich.  The
enormous Colossus of Rhodes was also the work of a disciple of
Lysippos.

But from this time the downward tendency in Greek art is only too
apparent, and very rapid.  The spread of Greek influence over
Asia, and later, in consequence of the conquest of Greece by
Rome, over Europe, had the effect of widening the market for
Greek production, but of drying up the sources of what was vital
in that production.  Athens and Sikyou became mere provincial
cities, and were shorn thenceforth of all artistic significance;
and Greek art, thus deprived of the roots of its life, continued
to grow for a while with a rank luxuriance of production, but
soon became normal and conventional.  The artists who followed
Lysippos contented themselves chiefly with seeking a merely
technical perfection in reproducing the creations of the earlier
and more original age.

At Pergamon under Attalus, in the last years of the third
century, there was something of an artistic revival.  This
Attalus successfully defended his country against an overwhelming
attack of the Gauls from the north.  To celebrate this victory,
an altar was erected to Zeus on the Acropolis of Pergamon, of
which the frieze represented the contest between Zeus and the
giants.  These sculptures are now to be found in Berlin.  They
are carved in high relief; the giants with muscles strained and
distended, their bodies writhing in the contortions of effort and
suffering; the gods, no longer calm and restrained, but
themselves overcome with the ardor of battle.  Zeus stretches his
arms over the battle-field hurling destruction everywhere.
Athene turns from the field, dragging at her heels a young giant
whom she has conquered, and reaches forward to the crown of
victory.  The wild, passionate action of the whole work remove it
far from the firm, orderly work of Pheidias, and carry it almost
to the extreme of pathetic representation in sculpture shown by
the Laocoon.

The contests with the Gauls, the fear inspired by the huge forms
of the barbarians, seem to have influenced powerfully the
imaginative conceptions of the sculptors of the school of
Pergamon.  One of the most famous works which they have left is
the figure long known as the Dying Gladiator, of which a copy
exists in the Capitoline Museum.  This represents a Gaul sinking
wounded to the ground, supporting himself on his right arm.  It
is remarkable for its stern realism.  The pain and sense of
defeat comes out in every feature.  Moreover, the nationality of
the fallen warrior is clearly expressed in the deep indentation
between the heavy brow and the prominent nose, in the face,
shaven, except the upper lip, in the uncouth, fleshy body, in the
rough hands and feet.  Usually the artist preferred to hint at
the race by some peculiarities of costume.  Here nothing but
uncompromising realism of feature will satisfy the sculptor.  A
companion piece to the Wounded Gaul, though less famous, is the
group of the Villa Ludovisi, which represents a Gaul, who has
slain his wife, in the act of stabbing himself in the neck.

In addition to inspiring the sculptures at Pergamon, Attalus
dedicated to the gods of Athens a votive offering in return for
the help which they had given him.  This was placed on the
Acropolis at Athens.  It consisted of four groups, representing
the gigantomachia or giant combat, the battle of the Amazons, the
battle of Marathon, and the victory of Attalus.  Figures from
these survive, a dead Amazon at Naples and a kneeling Persian at
the Vatican being the best known.

Another state which became famous in the declining days of Greek
art was the republic of Rhodes.  The Rhodian sculptors learned
their anatomy from Lysippos, and caught their dramatic instinct
from the artists of Pergamon.  Two of the most famous sculpture
groups in the world were produced at Rhodes,   the Laocoon, now
at the Vatican, and the Farnese Bull, now at Naples.  The former
was the work of three artists, given by Pliny as Agesandros,
Athanodorus, and Polydorus.  It has been accepted as one of the
masterpieces of the world, but as we shall see, it is manifestly
a work of a time of decadence.

The Laocoon illustrates excellently the extreme results of the
pathetic tendency.  The priest Laocoon is represented at the
moment when the serpents of Apollo surround him and his two sons,
born through their father's sin, and bear them all three down to
destruction.  The younger son, fatally bitten, falls back in
death agony.  The father yields slowly, his desperation giving
way before the merciless strength of the serpents.  The elder son
shrinks away in horror though bound fast by the inevitable coils.

The Laocoon shows the pathetic tendency at its utmost.  The
technical difficulties have been overcome with astonishing
success, and though the combination of figures is impossible in
life, it is marvellously effective in art.   But the group
depends for its interest purely on the accidental horror of the
situation.  There is no hint in the sculpture of the motive of
the tragedy, no suggestion of ethical significance in the
suffering portrayed.  It does not connect itself with any
principle of life.  In this way the work became a superb piece of
display, a TOUR DE FORCE of surprising composition but with
little serious meaning.

The same judgment may be extended to the Farnese Bull, the work
of Apollonius and Tauriscos, artists from Tralles who lived at
Rhodes.  This group represents the punishment of the cruel Dirke
at the hands of the sons of Antiope.  The beautiful queen clasps
the knee of one of the sons praying for grace, while the other
boy is about to throw over her the noose which is to bind her to
the bull.  Antiope stands in the background, a mere lay figure,
and scattered about are numerous small symbolical figures.  Like
the Laocoon the Farnese Bull exhibits surprising mastery of
technical obstacles, but, like the Laocoon, it falls short of
true tragic grandeur.  In a greater degree than the Laocoon it
trenches upon the province of painting.  It is more complicated
in its subject-matter; and the appearance in the group of many
small subsidiary figures, which in a painting might have been
given their proper value, being in the marble of the same relief
and distinction as the major characters, give a somewhat absurd
effect.  The little goddess who sits in the foreground, for
instance, is smaller than the dog.  Again, there is less of the
motive shown than in the Laocoon.  The group is seized at the
moment preceding the frightful catastrophe, but that moment is as
full of agony as the succeeding ones, and in addition there is
the feeling of suspense and oppression that comes from the
unfinished tragedy.  Altogether, the group, in spite of the
marvellous technical skill shown in details, is a failure when
judged on general lines.  Its interest lies in momentary and
apparently ummotived suffering, not in any truly serious
conception of life.

With the conquest of Greece by Rome, the final stage of Greek art
begins.  But the vigor and originality had departed.  The
sculptors aimed at and attained technical correctness, academic
beauty of form, sensuous feeling, perfection of details, but they
lost all imaginative power.   A good example of the work of this
period is found in the Apollo Belvidere now in the Vatican.  This
famous statue is an early Roman copy of a Greek original.  It
represents the god advancing easily, full of vigor and grace.  It
is marvellously correct in drawing, but quite without feeling of
any kind.

Another work of this period is the sleeping Ariadne of the
Vatican.  This represents a woman reclining in a studied
sentimental attitude, her arms thrown about her head, her body
swathed in its protecting drapery.  To the same period also
belongs almost the last notable work of Greek art, the degenerate
and sensuous conception of the Venus de Medici.  In this statue
the goddess stands as if rising from the sea, her attitude
reserved, yet coquettish and self-conscious.  The form is
technically perfect, graceful, and soft in its refinement, but
compared with the earlier Aphrodites it is an unworthy successor.

Still another famous statue is the Borghese Gladiator, of Agasius
of Ephesus, now in the Louvre.  The statue is merely a bit of
display, an effort to parade technical skill and anatomical
knowledge.  The gladiator throws his weight strongly on his right
leg, and holds one arm high above his head, giving to his whole
body an effect of straining.  The figure is strong and wiry.
Agasius was distinctly an imitator, as were most of the artists
of this age, among whom must be reckoned the skilful sculptor of
the crouching Venus, also in the Louvre.  The goddess is shown as
bending down in graceful curves until her body is supported on
the right leg, which is bent double.  The form is strong and
healthy, graceful and easy in its somewhat constrained posture.

During all of this final period Greek art was very largely
influenced by the relations which existed between Greece and
Rome.  About the year 200 B.C. the Roman conquest of Greece led
to an important traffic in works of art between Rome and the
Greek cities.  For a time, indeed, statues formed a recognized
part of the booty which graced every Roman triumph.  M. Fulvius
Nobilior carried away not less than five hundred and fifteen.
After the period of conquest the importation of Greek statues
continued at Rome, and in time Greek artists also began to remove
thither, so that Rome became not only the centre for the
collection of Greek works of art, but the chief seat of their
production.  At this time the Roman religious conceptions were
identified with those of Greece, and the Greek gods received the
Latin names by which we now know them.  The influence of the
Greeks upon Rome was very marked, but the reflex influence of the
material civilization of Italy upon Greek art was altogether bad,
and thus the splendor of classical art went out in
dilletantism and weakness.

The destruction of the Roman Empire by the barbarians makes a
break in the artistic history of the world.  Not for many
centuries was there a vestige of artistic production.  Even when
in Italy and France the monks began to make crude attempts to
reach out for and represent in painting and sculpture imaginative
conceptions of things beautiful, they took their material
exclusively from Christian sources.  The tradition of classical
stories had nearly vanished from the mind of Europe.  Not until
the Renaissance restored the knowledge of classical culture to
Europe do we find artists making any use of the wealth of
imaginative material stored up in the myths of Greece.  Then,
indeed, by the discovery and circulation of the poets of
mythology, the Greek stories and conceptions of characters,
divine and human, became known once more and were used freely,
remaining until the present day one chief source of material and
subject-matter for the use of the painter and sculptor.










This etext was produced from the 1902 Harper and Brothers edition by
David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





MR. BONAPARTE OF CORSICA

by John Kendrick Bangs




CHAPTER I:  CORSICA TO BRIENNE
1769-1779



Napoleon's father, Charles Bonaparte, was the honored progenitor of
thirteen children, of whom the man who subsequently became the
Emperor of the French, by some curious provision of fate, was the
second.  That the infant Napoleon should have followed rather than
led the procession is so foreign to the nature of the man that many
worthy persons unfamiliar with the true facts of history have
believed that Joseph was a purely apocryphal infant, or, as some have
suggested, merely an adopted child; but that Napoleon did upon this
occasion content himself with second place is an incontrovertible
fact.  Nor is it entirely unaccountable.  It is hardly to be supposed
that a true military genius, such as Napoleon is universally conceded
to have been, would plunge into the midst of a great battle without
first having acquainted himself with the possibilities of the future.
A reconnoitre of the field of action is the first duty of a
successful commander; and hence it was that Napoleon, not wishing to
rush wholly unprepared into the battle of life, assigned to his
brother Joseph the arduous task of first entering into the world to
see how the land lay.  Joseph having found everything to his
satisfaction, Napoleon made his appearance in the little island of
Corsica, recently come under French domination the 15th day August,
1769.  Had he been born two months earlier, we are told, he would
have been an Italian.  Had he been born a hundred years later, it is
difficult to say what he would have been.  As it was, he was born a
Frenchman.  It is not pleasant to contemplate what the man's future
would have been had he been born an Italian, nor is it easy to
picture that future with any confidence born of certainty.  Since the
days of Caesar, Italy had not produced any great military commander,
and it is not likely that the powers would have changed their scheme,
confirmed by sixteen centuries of observance, in Napoleon's behalf--a
fact which Napoleon himself realized, for he often said in his latter
days, with a shudder:  "I hate to think how inglorious I should have
become had I been born two months earlier and entered the world as an
Italian.  I should have been another Joseph--not that Joseph is not a
good man, but he is not a great man.  Ah!  Bourrienne, we cannot be
too careful in the selection of our birthdays."

It is the testimony of all who knew him in his infancy that Napoleon
was a good child.  He was obedient and respectful to his mother, and
sometimes at night when, on account of some indigestible quality of
his food or other cause, it was necessary for his father to make a
series of forced marches up and down the spacious nursery in the
beautiful home at Ajaccio, holding the infant warrior in his arms,
certain premonitions of his son's future career dawned upon the
parent.  His anguish was voiced in commanding tones; his wails, like
his subsequent addresses to his soldiers, were short, sharp, clear,
and decisive, nor would he brook the slightest halt in these midnight
marches until the difficulties which stood in his path had been
overcome.  His confidence in himself at this early period was
remarkable.  Quick to make up his mind, he was tenacious of his
purpose to the very end.

It is related that when barely seven months old, while sitting in his
nurse's lap, by means of signs which she could not fail to
comprehend, he expressed the desire, which, indeed, is characteristic
of most healthy Children of that age, to possess the whole of the
outside world, not to mention the moon and other celestial bodies.
Reaching his little hands out in the direction of the Continent,
lying not far distant over the waters of the Mediterranean, he made
this demand; and while, of course, his desire was not granted upon
the instant, it is the testimony of history that he never lost sight
of that cherished object.

After providing Napoleon with eleven other brothers and sisters,
Charles Bonaparte died, and left his good and faithful wife Letitia
to care for the future greatness of his family, a task rendered
somewhat the more arduous than it might otherwise have been by the
lack of income; but the good woman, who had much of Napoleon's nature
in her make-up, was equal to the occasion.  She had her sons to help
her, and was constantly buoyed up by the expressed determination of
her second child to place her beyond the reach of want in that future
day when the whole world lay grovelling at his feet.

"Do not worry, mother," Napoleon said.  "Let Joseph and Lucien and
Louis and Jerome and the girls be educated; as for me, I can take
care of myself.  I, who at the age of three have mastered the Italian
language, have a future before me.  I will go to France, and then--"

"Well! what then?" his mother asked.

"Nous verrons!" Napoleon replied, turning on his heel and walking out
of the house whistling a military march.

From this it will be seen that even in his in fancy Napoleon had his
ideas as to his future course.  Another anecdote, which is taken from
the unpublished memoirs of the grandson of one of his Corsican
nurses, illustrates in an equally vivid manner how, while a mere
infant in arms, he had a passion for and a knowledge of military
terms.  Early one morning the silence was broken by the incipient
Emperor calling loudly for assistance.  His nurse, rushing to him,
discovered that the point of a pin was sticking into his back.
Hastily removing the cause of the disturbance, she endeavored to
comfort him:

"Never mind, sweetheart," she said, "it's only a nasty pin."

"Nasty pin!" roared Napoleon.  "By the revered name of Paoli, I swear
I thought it was a bayonet!"

It was, no doubt, this early realization of the conspicuous part he
was to play in the history of his time that made the youthful
Bonaparte reserved of manner, gloomy, and taciturn, and prone to
irritability.  He felt within him the germ of future greatness, and
so became impatient of restraint.  He completely dominated the
household.  Joseph, his elder brother, became entirely subject to the
imperious will of the future Emperor; and when in fancy Napoleon
dreamed of those battles to come, Joseph was always summoned to take
an active part in the imaginary fight.  Now he was the bridge of
Lodi, and, lying flat on his back, was forced to permit his
bloodthirsty brother to gallop across him, shouting words of
inspiration to a band of imaginary followers; again he was forced to
pose as a snow-clad Alp for Napoleon to climb, followed laboriously
by Lucien and Jerome and the other children.  It cannot be supposed
that this was always pleasing to Joseph, but he never faltered when
the demand was made that he should act, because he did not dare.

"You bring up the girls, mother," Napoleon had said.  "Leave the boys
to me and I'll make kings of them all, if I have to send them over to
the United States, where all men will soon be potentates, and their
rulers merely servants--chosen to do their bidding."

Once, Joseph venturing to assert himself as the eldest son, Napoleon
smiled grimly.

"And what, pray, does that mean?" he asked, scornfully.

"That I and not you am the head of the family," replied Joseph.

"Very well," said Napoleon, rushing behind him, and, by a rapidly
conceived flank movement, giving Joseph a good sound kick.  "How does
the head of the family like the foot of the family?  Don't ever prate
of accidents of birth to me."

From that time on Joseph never murmured again, but obeyed blindly his
brother's slightest behest.  He would have permitted Napoleon to mow
him down with grape-shot without complaint rather than rebel and
incur the wrath which he knew would then fall upon his head.

At school the same defiance of restraint and contempt for superior
strength characterized Napoleon.  Here, too, his taciturn nature
helped him much.  If he were asked a question which he could not
answer, he would decline to speak, so that his instructors were
unable to state whether or not he was in ignorance as to the point
under discussion, and could mark him down conscientiously as
contumelious only.  Hence it was that he stood well in his studies,
but was never remarkable for deportment.  His favorite plaything,
barring his brother Joseph, was a small brass cannon that weighed
some thirty odd pounds, and which is still to be seen on the island
of Corsica.  Of this he once said:  "I'd rather hear its report than
listen to a German band; though if I could get them both playing at
the same time there'd be one German band less in the world."

This remark found its parallel later on when, placed by Barras in
command of the defenders of the Convention against the attacks of the
Sectionists, Napoleon was asked the chairman of the Assembly to send
them occasional reports as to how matters progressed.  His reply was
terse.

"Legislators," he said, "you ask me for an occasional report.  If you
listen you will hear the report of my cannon.  That is all you'll
get, and it will be all you need.  I am here.  I will save you."

"It is a poor time for jokes," said a representative.

"It is a worse time for paper reports," retorted Napoleon.  "It would
take me longer to write out a legislative report than it will to
clean out the mob.  Besides, I want it understood at this end of my
career that autograph-hunters are going to get left."

As he turned, Barras asked him as to his intentions.

"Where are you going?" he asked.

"To make a noise in the world," cried Napoleon; "au revoir."

That he had implanted in him the essential elements of a great
fighter his school-companions were not long in finding out.

When not more than five years of age he fell in love with a little
schoolmate, and, being jeered at for his openly avowed sentiments, he
threatened to thrash the whole school, adding to the little maiden
that he would thrash her as well unless she returned his love, a line
of argument which completely won her heart, particularly in view of
the fact that he proved his sincerity by fulfilling that part of his
assumed obligations which referred to the subjugation of the rest of
the school.  It was upon this occasion that in reference to his
carelessness of dress, his schoolmates composed the rhyme,


"Napoleon di mezza calzetta
Fa l'amore a Giacominetta."


which, liberally translated, means,


"Hi!  Look at Nap!  His socks down of his shin,
Is making love to little Giacomin."


To this Napoleon, on the authority of the Memoirs of his Father's
Hired Man, retorted:


"I would advise you, be not indiscreet,
Or I will yank YOUR socks right of your feet."


All of which goes to show that at no time in his youth was he to be
trifled with.  In poetry or a pitched battle he was quite equal to
any emergency, and his companions were not long in finding it out.

So passed the infancy of Mr. Bonaparte, of Corsica.  It was, after
all, much like the extreme youth of most other children.  In
everything he undertook he was facile princeps, and in nothing that
he said or did is there evidence that he failed to appreciate what
lay before him.  A visitor to the family once ventured the remark, "I
am sorry, Napoleon, for you little Corsicans.  You have no Fourth of
July or Guy Fawkes Day to celebrate."

"Oh, as for that," said Napoleon, "I for one do not mind.  I will
make national holidays when I get to be a man, and at present I can
get along without them.  What's the use of Fourth of July when you
can shoot off fireworks everyday?"

It was a pertinent question, the visitor departed much impressed with
the boy's precocity, which was rendered doubly memorable by
Napoleon's humor in discharging fifteen pounds of wadding from his
cannon into the visitor's back as he went out of the front gate.

At the age of six Napoleon put aside all infantile pleasures, and at
eight assumed all the dignity of that age.  He announced his
intention to cease playing war with his brother Joseph.

"I am no longer a child, Joseph," he said; "I shall no longer thrash
you in play.  Here-after I shall do it in sober earnest."

Which no doubt is why, in 1779, Napoleon having stuck faithfully to
his promise, Joseph heartily seconded his younger brother's demand
that he should leave Corsica and take a course of military
instruction at Brienne.

"I shall no doubt miss my dear brother Napoleon," Joseph said to his
mother; "but I would not stand in the way of his advancement.  Let
him go, even though by his departure I am deprived of all opportunity
to assist him in his pleasing games of war."



CHAPTER II:  BRIENNE
1779-1785



As we have seen, the young Corsican was only ten years of age when,
through the influence of Count Marboeuf, an old friend of the
Bonaparte family, he was admitted to the military school at Brienne.
Those who were present at the hour of his departure from home say
that Napoleon would have wept like any other child had he yielded to
the impulses of his heart, and had be not detected a smile of
satisfaction upon the lips of his brother Joseph.  It was this smile
that drove all tender emotions from his breast.  Taking Joseph to one
side, he requested to know the cause of his mirth.

"I was thinking of something funny," said Joseph, paling slightly as
he observed the stern expression of Napoleon's face.

"Oh, indeed," said Napoleon; "and what was that something?  I'd like
to smile myself."

"H'm!--ah--why," faltered Joseph, "it may not strike you as funny,
you know.  What is a joke for one man is apt to be a serious matter
for another, particularly when that other is of a taciturn and
irritable disposition."

"Very likely," said Napoleon, dryly; "and sometimes what is a joke
for the man of mirth is likewise in the end a serious matter for that
same humorous person.  This may turn out to be the case in the
present emergency.  What was the joke?  If I do not find it a
humorous joke, I'll give you a parting caress which you won't forget
in a hurry."

"I was only thinking," said Joseph, uneasily, "that it is a very good
thing for that little ferry-boat you are going away on that you are
going on it."

Here Joseph smiled weakly, but Napoleon was grim as ever.

"Well," he said, impatiently, "what of that?"

"Why," returned Joseph, "it seemed to me that such a tireless little
worker as the boat is would find it very restful to take a Nap."

For an instant Napoleon was silent.

"Joseph," said he, as he gazed solemnly out of the window, "I thank
you from the bottom of my heart for this.  I had had regrets at
leaving home.  A moment ago I was ready to break down for the sorrow
of parting from my favorite Alp, from my home, from my mother, and my
little brass cannon; but now--now I can go with a heart steeled
against emotion.  If you are going in for humor of that kind, I'm
glad I'm going away.  Farewell."

With this, picking Joseph up in his arms and concealing him beneath
the sofa cushions, Napoleon imprinted a kiss upon his mother's cheek,
rushed aboard the craft that was to bear him to fame, and was soon
but a memory in the little house at Ajaccio.  "Parting is such sweet
sorrow," murmured Joseph, as he watched the little vessel bounding
over the turquoise waters of the imprisoned sea.  "I shall miss him;
but there are those who wax fat on grief, and, if I know myself, I am
of that brand."

Arrived at Paris, Napoleon was naturally awe-stricken by the
splendors of that wonderful city.

"I shall never forget the first sight I had of Paris," he said, years
later, when speaking of his boyhood to Madame Junot, with whom he was
enjoying a tete-a-tete in the palace at Versailles.  "I wondered if I
hadn't died of sea-sickness on the way over, as I had several times
wished I might, and got to heaven.  I didn't know how like the other
place it was at that time, you see.  It was like an enchanted land, a
World's Fair forever, and the prices I had to pay for things quite
carried out the World's Fair idea.  They were enormous.  Weary with
walking, for instance, I hired a fiacre and drove about the city for
an hour, and it cost me fifty francs; but I fell in with pleasant
enough people, one of whom gave me a ten-franc ticket entitling me to
a seat on a park bench--for five francs."

Madame Junot laughed.

"And yet they claim that bunco is a purely American institution," she
said.

"Dame!" cried Napoleon, rising from the throne, and walking excitedly
up and down the palace floor, "I never realized until this moment
that I had been swindled!  Bourrienne, send Fouche to me.  I remember
the man distinctly, and if he lives he has yet to die."

Calming down, he walked to Madame Junot's side, and, taking her by
the hand, continued:

"And then the theatres!  What revelations of delight they were!  I
used to go to the Theatre Francais whenever I could sneak away and
had the money to seat me with the gods in the galleries.  Bernhardt
was then playing juvenile parts, and Coquelin had not been heard of.
Ah! my dear Madame Junot," he added, giving her ear a delicate pinch,
"those were the days when life seemed worth the living--when one of a
taciturn nature and prone to irritability could find real pleasure in
existence.  Oh to be unknown again!"

And then, Madame Junot's husband having entered the room, the Emperor
once more relapsed into a moody silence.

But to return to Brienne.  Napoleon soon found that there is a gulf
measurable by no calculable distance between existence as the
dominating force of a family and life as a new boy at a boarding-
school.  He found his position reversed, and he began for the first
time in his life to appreciate the virtues of his brother Joseph.  He
who had been the victorious general crossing the Alps now found
himself the Alp, with a dozen victorious generals crossing him; he
who had been the gunner was now the target, and his present inability
to express his feelings in language which his tormentors could
understand, for he had not yet mastered the French tongue, kept him
in a state of being which may well be termed volcanic.

"I simply raged within in those days,"  Napoleon once said to Las
Casas.  "I could have swallowed my food raw and it would have been
cooked on its way down, I boiled so.  They took me for a snow-clad
Alp, when, as a matter of fact, I was a small Vesuvius, with a
temperature that would have made Tabasco sauce seem like iced water
by contrast."

His treatment at the hands of his fellow-students did much to
increase his irritability, but he kept himself well in hand, biding
the time when he could repay their insults with interest.  They
jeered him because he was short--short of stature and short of funds;
they twitted him on being an alien, calling him an Italian, and
asking him why he did not seek out a position in the street-cleaning
bureau instead of endeavoring to associate with gentlemen.  To this
the boy made a spirited reply.

"I am fitting myself for that," he said.  "I'll sweep your Parisian
streets some day, and some of you particles will go with the rest of
the dust before my broom."

He little guessed how prophetic were these words.

Again, they tormented Napoleon on being the son of a lawyer, and
asked him who his tailor was, and whether or not his garments were
the lost suits of his father's clients, the result of which was that,
though born of an aristocratic family, the boy became a pronounced
Republican, and swore eternal enmity to the high-born.  Another
result of this attitude towards him was that he retired from the
companionship of all save his books, and he became intimate with
Homer and Ossian and Plutarch--familiar with the rise and fall of
emperors and empires.  Challenged to fight a duel with one of his
classmates for a supposititious insult, he accepted, and, having the
choice in weapons, chose an examination in mathematics, the one first
failing in a demonstration to blow his brains out.  "That is the
safer for you," he said to his adversary.  "You are sure to lose; but
the after-effects will not be fatal, because you have no brains to
blow out, so you can blow out a candle instead."

Whatever came of the duel we are not informed; but it is to be
presumed that it did not result fatally for young Bonaparte, for he
lived many years after the incident, as most of our readers are
probably aware.  Had he not done so, this biography would have had to
stop here, and countless readers of our own day would have been
deprived of much entertaining fiction that is even now being
scattered broadcast over the world with Napoleon as its hero.  His
love of books combined with his fondness for military life was never
more beautifully expressed than when he wrote to his mother:  "With
my sword at my side and my Homer in my pocket, I hope to carve my way
through the world."

The beauty and simplicity of this statement is not at all affected by
Joseph's flippant suggestion that by this Napoleon probably meant
that he would read his enemies to sleep with his Homer, and then use
his sword to cut their heads off.  Joseph, as we have already seen,
had been completely subjugated by his younger brother, and it is not
to be wondered at, perhaps, that, with his younger brother at a safe
distance, he should manifest some jealousy, and affect to treat his
sentiments with an unwarranted levity.

For Napoleon's self-imposed solitude everything at Brienne arranged
itself propitiously.  Each of the students was provided with a small
patch of ground which he could do with as he pleased, and Napoleon's
use of his allotted share was characteristic.  He converted it into a
fortified garden, surrounded by trees and palisades.

"Now I can mope in peace," he said--and he did.

It has been supposed by historians that it was here that Napoleon did
all of his thinking, mapping out his future career, and some of them
have told us what he thought.  He dreamed of future glory always, one
of them states; but whether upon the authority of a palisade or a
tiger-lily is not mentioned.  Others have given us his soliloquies as
he passed to and fro in this little retreat alone, and heard only by
the stars at night; but for ourselves, we must be accurate, and it is
due to the reader at this point that we should confess--having no
stars in our confidence--our entire ignorance as to what Napoleon
Bonaparte said, did, or thought when sitting in solitude in his
fortified bower; though if our candid impression is desired we have
no hesitation in saying that we believe him to have been in Paris
enjoying the sights of the great city during those periods of
solitude.  Boys are boys in all lands, and a knowledge of that
peculiar species of human beings, the boarding-school boy, is
convincing that, given a prospect of five or six hours of
uninterrupted solitude, no youth of proper spirit would fail to avail
himself of the opportunities thus offered to see life, particularly
with a city like Paris within easy "hooky" distance.

It must also be remembered that the French had at this time abolished
the hereafter, along with the idea of a Deity and all pertaining
thereto, so that there was nothing beyond a purely temporal
discipline and lack of funds to interfere with Bonaparte's enjoyment
of all the pleasures which Paris could give.  Of temporal discipline
he need have had no fear, since, it was perforce relaxed while he was
master of his solitude; as for the lack of funds, history has shown
that this never interfered with the fulfilment of Napoleon's hopes,
and hence the belief that the beautiful pictures, drawn by historians
and painted by masters of the brush, of Napoleon in solitude should
be revised to include a few accessories, drawn from such portions of
Parisian life as will readily suggest themselves.

In his studies, however, Napoleon ranked high.  His mathematical
abilities were so marked that it was stated that he could square the
circle with his eyes closed and both hands tied behind his back.

"The only circle I could not square at that time," said he, "was the
family circle, being insufficiently provided with income to do so.  I
might have succeeded better had not Joseph's appetite grown too fast
for the strength of my pocket; that was the only respect, however, in
which I ever had any difficulty in keeping up with my dear elder
brother."  It was here, too, that he learned the inestimably
important military fact that the shortest distance between two points
is in a straight line; and that he had fully mastered that fact was
often painfully evident to such of his schoolmates as seemed to force
him to measure with his right arm the distance between his shoulder
and the ends of their noses.  Nor was he utterly without wit.  Asked
by a cribbing comrade in examination what a corollary was, Napoleon
scornfully whispered back:

"A mathematical camel with two humps."

In German only was he deficient, much to the irritation of his
instructor.

"Will you ever learn anything?" asked M. Bouer, the German teacher.

"Certainly," said Napoleon; "but no more German.  I know the only
word I need in that language."

"And what, pray, is that?"

"Surrender; that's all I'll ever wish to say to the Germans.  But
lest I get it wrong, pray tell me the imperative form of surrender in
your native tongue."

M. Bouer's reply is not known to history, but it was probably not one
which the Master of Etiquette at Brienne could have entirely
commended.

So he lived at Brienne, thoroughly mastering the science of war;
acquiring a military spirit; making no friends, but commanding
ultimately the fearsome respect of his school-mates.  One or two
private interviews with little aristocrats who jeered at him for his
ancestry convinced them that while he might not have had illustrious
ancestors, it was not unlikely that he would in time develop
illustrious descendants, and the jeerings and sneerings soon ceased.
The climax of Bonaparte's career at Brienne was in 1784, when he
directed a snowball fight between two evenly divided branches of the
school with such effect that one boy had his skull cracked and the
rest were laid up for weeks from their wounds.

"It was a wonderful fight," remarked Napoleon, during his campaign in
Egypt.  "I took good care that an occasional missent ball should bowl
off the hat of M. Bouer, and whenever any particularly aristocratic
aristocrat's head showed itself above the ramparts, an avalanche fell
upon his facade with a dull, sickening thud.  I have never seen an
American college football game, but from all I can learn from
accounts in the Paris editions of the American newspapers the effects
physical in our fight and that game are about the same."

In 1784, shortly after this episode, Napoleon left Brienne, having
learned all that those in authority there could teach him, and in
1785 he applied for and received admission to the regular army, much
to the relief of Joseph.

"If he had flunked and come back to Corsica to live," said Joseph, "I
think I should have emigrated.  I love him dearly, but I'm fonder of
myself, and Corsica, large as it is, is too small to contain Napoleon
Bonaparte and his brother Joseph simultaneously, particularly as
Joseph is distinctly weary of being used as an understudy for a gory
battle-field."



CHAPTER III:  PARIS--VALENCE--LYONS--CORSICA
1785-1793



The feeling among the larger boys at Brienne at Napoleon's departure
was much the same as that experienced by Joseph when his soon to-be-
famous brother departed from Corsica.  The smaller boys regretted his
departure, since it had been one of their greatest pleasures to watch
Napoleon disciplining the upper classmen, but Bonaparte was as glad
to go as the elders were to have him.

"Brienne is good enough in its way," said he; "but what's the use of
fighting children?  It's merely a waste of time cracking a
youngster's skull with a snowball when you can go out into the real
world and let daylight into a man's whole system with a few ounces of
grape-shot."

He had watched developments at Paris, too, with the keenest interest,
and was sufficiently far-seeing to know that the troubles of the King
and Queen and their aristocratic friends boded well for a man fond of
a military life who had sense enough to be on the right side.  That
it took an abnormal degree of intelligence to know which was the
right side in those troublous days he also realized, and hence he
cultivated that taciturnity and proneness to irritability which we
have already mentioned.

"If it had not been for my taciturnity, Talleyrand," he observed,
when in the height of his power, "I should have got it in the neck."

"Got what in the neck?" asked Talleyrand.

"The guillotine," rejoined the Emperor.  "It was the freedom of
speech which people of those sanguinary days allowed themselves that
landed many a fine head in the basket.  As for me, I simply held my
tongue with both hands, and when I wearied of that I called some one
in to hold it for me.  If I had filled the newspapers with
'Interviews with Napoleon Bonaparte,' and articles on 'Where is
France at?' with monographs in the leading reviews every month on
'Why I am what I am,' and all such stuff as that, I'd have condensed
my career into one or two years, and ended by having my head divorced
from my shoulders in a most commonplace fashion.  Taciturnity is a
big thing when you know how to work it, and so is proneness to
irritability.  The latter keeps you from making friends, and I didn't
want any friends just then.  They were luxuries which I couldn't
afford.  You have to lend money to friends; you have to give them
dinners and cigars, and send bonbons to their sisters.  A friend in
those days would have meant bankruptcy of the worst sort.
Furthermore, friends embarrass you when you get into public office,
and try to make you conspicuous when you'd infinitely prefer to saw
wood and say nothing.  I took my loneliness straight, and that is one
of the reasons why I am now the Emperor of France, and your master."

Before entering the army a year at a Parisian military school kept
Bonaparte busy.  There, as at Brienne, he made his influence felt.
He found his fellow-pupils at Paris living in a state of luxury that
was not in accord with his ideas as to what a soldier should have.
Whether or not his new school-mates, after the time-honored custom,
tossed him in a blanket on the first night of his arrival, history
does not say, but Bonaparte had hardly been at the school a week when
he complained to the authorities that there was too much luxury in
their system for him.

"Cadets do not need feather-beds and eider-down quilts," he said;
"and as for the sumptuous viands we have served at mealtime, they are
utterly inappropriate.  I'd rather have a plate of Boston baked beans
or steaming buckwheat cakes to put my mind into that state which
should characterize the thinking apparatus of a soldier than a dozen
of the bouchees financieres and lobster Newburgs and other made-
dishes which you have on your menu.  Made-dishes and delicate
beverages make one mellow and genial of disposition.  What we need is
the kind of food that will destroy our amiability and put us in a
frame of mind calculated to make willing to kill our best friends--
nay, our own brothers and sisters--if occasion arises, with a smiling
face.  Look at me.  I could kill my brother Joseph, dear as he is to
me, and never shed a tear, and it's buckwheat-cakes and waffles that
have done it!"

Likewise he abhorred dancing.

"Away with dancing men!" he cried, impatiently, at one time when in
the height of his power, to his Minister of War.  "Suppose when I was
crossing the Alps my soldiers had been of your dancing sort.  How far
would I have got if every time the band played a two-step my
grenadiers had dropped their guns to pirouette over those snow-white
wastes?  Let the diplomats do the dancing.  For soldiers give me men
to whom the polka is a closed book and the waltz an abomination."

Holding these views, he naturally failed to win the sympathy of his
fellows at the Paris school who, young nobles for the most part,
could not understand his point of view.  So, having nothing else to
do, he applied himself solely to his studies and to reflection, and
it was the happiest moment of his life up to that time when, having
passed his examinations for entrance to the regular army, he received
his commission as a second lieutenant.

"Now we're off!" he said to himself, as he surveyed himself in the
mirror, after donning his uniform.

"It does not set very well in the back," remarked one of the maids of
the pension in which he lived, glancing in at the door.

"It does not matter," returned Bonaparte, loftily.  "As long as it
sets well in front I'm satisfied; for you should know, madame, that a
true soldier never shows his back, and that is the kind of a military
person I am.  A false front would do for me.  I am no tin soldier,
which in after-years it will interest you to remember.  When you are
writing your memoirs this will make an interesting anecdote."

From this it is to be inferred that at this time he had no thought of
Moscow.  Immediately after his appointment Bonaparte repaired to
Valence, where his regiment was stationed and where he formed a
strong attachment for the young daughter of Madame du Colombier, with
whom, history records, he ate cherries before breakfast.  This was
his sole dissipation at that time, but his felicity was soon to be
interrupted.  His regiment was ordered to Lyons, and Bonaparte and
his love were parted.

"Duty calls me, my dear," he said, on leaving her.  "I would stay if
I could, but I can't, and, on the whole, it is just as well.  If I
stayed I should marry you, and that would never do.  You cannot
support me, nor I you.  We cannot live on cherries, and as yet my
allowance is an ingrowing one--which is to say that it goes from me
to my parent, and not from my parent to me.  Therefore, my only love,
farewell.  Marry some one else.  There are plenty of men who are fond
of cherries before breakfast, and there is no reason why one so
attractive as you should not find a lover."

The unhappy girl was silent for a moment.  Then, with an ill-
suppressed sob, she bade him go.

"You are right, Napoleon," she said.  "Go.  Go where duty calls you,
and if you get tired of Lyons--"

"Yes?" he interrupted, eagerly.

"Try leopards!" she cried, rushing from his embrace into the house.

Bonaparte never forgave this exhibition of flippancy, though many
years after, when he learned that his former love, who had married,
as he had bade her do, and suffered, was face to face with
starvation, it is said, on the authority of one of his ex-valet's
memoirs, that he sent her a box of candied cherries from one of the
most expensive confectionery-shops of Paris.

After a brief sojourn at Lyons, Napoleon was summoned with his
regiment to quell certain popular tumults at Auxonne.  There he
distinguished himself as a handler of mobs, and learned a few things
that were of inestimable advantage to him later.  Speaking of it in
after-years, he observed:  "It is my opinion, my dear Emperor Joseph,
that grape-shot is the only proper medicine for a mob.  Some people
prefer to turn the hose on them, but none of that for me.  They fear
water as they do death, but they get over water.  Death is more
permanent.  I've seen many a rioter, made respectable by a good
soaking, return to the fray after he had dried out, but in all my
experience I have never known a man who was once punctured by a
discharge of grape-shot who took any further interest in rioting."

About this time he began to regulate his taciturnity.  On occasions
he had opinions which he expressed most forcibly.  In 1790, having
gone to an evening reception at Madame Neckar's, he electrified his
hostess and her guests by making a speech of some five hundred words
in length, too long to be quoted here in full, but so full of import
and delivered with such an air of authority that La Fayette, who was
present, paled visibly, and Mirabeau, drawing Madame de Stael to one
side, whispered, trembling with emotion, "Who is that young person?"

Whether this newly acquired tendency to break in upon the reserve
which had hitherto been the salient feature of his speech had
anything to do with it or not we are not aware, but shortly
afterwards Napoleon deemed it wise to leave his regiment for a while,
and to return to his Corsican home on furlough.  Of course an
affecting scene was enacted by himself and his family when they were
at last reunited.  Letitia, his fond mother, wept tears of joy, and
Joseph, shaking him by the hand, rushed, overcome with emotion, from
the house.  Napoleon shortly after found him weeping in the garden.

"Why so sad, Joseph?" he inquired.  "Are you sorry I have returned?"

"No, dear Napoleon," said Joseph, turning away his head to hide his
tears, "it is not that.  I was only weeping because--because, in the
nature of things, you will have to go away again, and--the--the idea
of parting from you has for the moment upset my equilibrium."

"Then we must proceed to restore it," said Napoleon, and, taking
Joseph by the right arm, he twisted it until Joseph said that he felt
quite recovered.

Napoleon's stay at Corsica was quite uneventful.  Fearing lest by
giving way to love of family, and sitting and talking with them in
the luxuriously appointed parlor below-stairs, he should imbibe too
strong a love for comfort and ease, and thus weaken his soldierly
instincts, as well as break in upon that taciturnity which, as we
have seen, was the keynote of his character, he had set apart for
himself a small room on the attic floor, where he spent most of his
time undisturbed, and at the same time made Joseph somewhat easier in
his mind.

"When he's up-stairs I am comparatively safe," said Joseph.  "If he
stayed below with us I fear I should have a return of my nervous
prostration."

Meantime, Napoleon was promoted to a first lieutenancy, and shortly
after, during the Reign of Terror in Paris, having once more for the
moment yielded to an impulse to speak out in meeting, he denounced
anarchy in unmeasured terms, and was arrested and taken to Paris.

"It was a fortunate arrest for me," he said.  "There I was in Corsica
with barely enough money to pay my way back to the capital.
Arrested, the State had to pay my fare, and I got back to active
political scenes on a free pass.  As for the trial, it was a farce,
and I was triumphantly acquitted.  The jury was out only fifteen
minutes.  I had so little to say for myself that the judges began to
doubt if I had any ideas on any subject--or, as one of them said,
having no head to mention, it would be useless to try and cut it off.
Hence my acquittal and my feeling that taciturnity is the mother of
safety."

Then came the terrible attack of the mob upon the Tuileries on the
20th of June, 1792.  Napoleon was walking in the street with
Bourrienne when the attack began.

"There's nothing like a lamp-post for an occasion like this, it
broadens one's views so," he said, rapidly climbing up a convenient
post, from which he could see all that went on.  "I didn't know that
this was the royal family's reception-day.  Do you want to know what
I think?"

"Mumm is the word," whispered Bourrienne.  "This is no time to have
opinions."

"Mumm may be the word, but water is the beverage.  Mumm is too dry.
What this crowd needs is a good wetting down," retorted Bonaparte.
"If I were Louis XVI. I'd turn the hose on these tramps, and keep
them at bay until I could get my little brass cannon loaded.  When I
had that loaded, I'd let them have a few balls hot from the bat.
This is what comes of being a born king.  Louis doesn't know how to
talk to the people.  He's all right for a state-dinner, but when it
comes to a mass-meeting he is not in it."

And then as the King, to gratify the mob, put the red cap of
Jacobinism upon his head, the man who was destined before many years
to occupy the throne of France let fall an ejaculation of wrath.

"The wretches!" he cried.  "How little they know!  They've only given
him another hat to talk through!  They'll have to do their work all
over again, unless Louis takes my advice and travels abroad for his
health."

These words were prophetic, for barely two months later the second
and most terrible and portentous attack upon the palace took place--
an attack which Napoleon witnessed, as he had witnessed the first,
from a convenient lamp-post, and which filled him with disgust and
shame; and it was upon that night of riot and bloodshed that he gave
utterance to one of his most famous sayings.

"Bourrienne," said he, as with his faithful companions he laboriously
climbed the five flights of stairs leading to his humble apartment,
"I hate the aristocrats, as you know; and to-day has made me hate the
populace as well.  What is there left to like?"

"Alas! lieutenant, I cannot say," said Bourrienne, shaking his head
sadly.

"What," continued Napoleon, "is the good of anything?"

"I give it up," returned Bourrienne, with a sigh.  "I never was good
at riddles.  What IS the good of anything?"

"Nothing!" said Napoleon, laconically, as he took off his uniform and
went to bed.



CHAPTER IV:  SARDINIA--TOULON--NICE--PARIS--BARRAS--JOSEPHINE
1793-1796



Greatness now began to dawn for Napoleon.  Practically penniless, in
a great and heartless city, even the lower classes began to perceive
that here was one before whom there lay a brilliant future.
Restaurateurs, laundresses, confectioners--all trusted him.  An
instance of the regard people were beginning to have for him is shown
in the pathetic interview between Napoleon and Madame Sans Gene, his
laundress.

"Here is your wash, lieutenant," said she, after climbing five
flights of stairs, basket in hand, to the miserable lodging of the
future Emperor.

Napoleon looked up from his books and counted the clothes.

"There is one sock missing," said he, sternly.

"No," returned Sans Gene.  "Half of each sock was washed away, and I
sewed the remaining halves into one.  One good sock is better than
two bad ones.  If you ever lose a leg in battle you may find the odd
one handy."

"How can I ever repay you?" cried Napoleon, touched by her friendly
act.

"I'm sure I don't know," returned Madame Sans Gene, demurely, "unless
you will escort me to the Charity Ball--I'll buy the tickets."

"And, pray, what good will that do?" asked Bonaparte.

"It will make Lefebvre jealous," said Madame Sans Gene, "and maybe
that will bring him to the point.  I want to marry him, but,
encourage him as I will, he does not propose, and as in revising the
calendar the government has abolished leap-year, I really don't know
what to do."

"I cannot go to the ball," said Napoleon, sadly.  "I don't dance,
and, besides, I have loaned my dress-suit to Bourrienne.  But I will
flirt with you on the street if you wish, and perhaps that will
suffice."

It is hardly necessary to tell the reader that the ruse was
successful, and that Lefebvre, thus brought to the point, married
Madame Sans Gene, and subsequently, through his own advancement, made
her the Duchess of Dantzig.  The anecdote suffices to show how
wretchedly poor and yet how full of interest and useful to those
about him Napoleon was at the time.

In February, 1793, a change for the better in his fortunes occurred.
Bonaparte, in cooperation with Admiral Turget, was ordered to make a
descent upon Sardinia.  What immediately followed can best be told in
Bonaparte's own words.  "My descent was all right," he said
afterwards, "and I had the Sardines all ready to put in boxes, when
Turget had a fit of sea-sickness, lost his bearings, and left me in
the lurch.  There was nothing left for me but to go back to Corsica
and take it out of Joseph, which I did, much to Joseph's unhappiness.
It was well for the family that I did so, for hardly had I arrived at
Ajaccio when I found my old friend Paoli wrapping Corsica up in a
brown-paper bundle to send to the King of England with his
compliments.  This I resisted, with the result that our whole family
was banished, and those fools of Corsicans broke into our house and
smashed all of our furniture.  They little knew that that furniture,
if in existence to-day, would bring millions of francs as curios if
sold at auction.  It was thus that the family came to move to France
and that I became in fact what I had been by birth--a Frenchman.  If
I had remained a Corsican, Paoli's treachery would have made me an
Englishman, to which I should never have become reconciled, although
had I been an Englishman I should have taken more real pleasure out
of the battle of Waterloo than I got.

"After this I was ordered to Toulon.  The French forces here were
commanded by General Cartaux, who had learned the science of war
painting portraits in Paris.  He ought to have been called General
Cartoon.  He besieged Toulon in a most impressionistic fashion.  He'd
bombard and bombard and bombard, and then leave the public to guess
at the result.  It's all well enough to be an impressionist in
painting, but when it comes to war the public want more decided
effects.  When I got there, as a brigadier-general, I saw that
Cartaux was wasting his time and ammunition.  His idea seemed to be
that by firing cannon all day he could so deafen the enemy that at
night the French army could sneak into Toulon unheard and capture the
city, which was, to say the least, unscientific.  I saw at once that
Cartaux must go, and I soon managed to make life so unbearable for
him that he resigned, and a man named Doppet, a physician, was placed
in command.  Doppet was worse than Cartaux.  Whenever anybody got
hurt he'd stop the war and prescribe for the injured man.  If he
could have prescribed for the enemy they'd have died in greater
numbers I have no doubt, but, like the idiot he was, he practised on
his own forces.  Besides, he was more interested in surgery than in
capturing Toulon.  He always gave the ambulance corps the right of
line, and I believe to this day that his plan of routing the English
involved a sudden rush upon them, taking them by surprise, and the
subsequent amputation of their legs.  The worst feature of the
situation, as I found it, was that these two men, falling back upon
their rights as my superior officers, refused to take orders from me.
I called their attention to the fact that rank had been abolished,
and that in France one man was now as good as another; but they were
stubborn, so I wrote to Paris and had them removed.  Then came
Dugommier, who backed me up in my plans, and Toulon as a consequence
immediately fell with a dull, sickening thud."

It was during this siege that Bonaparte first encountered Junot.
Having occasion to write a note while under fire from the enemy's
batteries, Napoleon called for a stenographer.  Junot came to him.

"Do you know shorthand?" asked the general, as a bomb exploded at his
feet.

"Slightly," said Junot, calmly.

"Take this message," returned the general, coolly, dictating.

Junot took down Bonaparte's words, but just as he finished another
bomb exploded near by, scattering dust and earth and sand all over
the paper.

"Confounded boors, interrupting a gentleman at his correspondence!"
said Bonaparte, with an angry glance at the hostile gunners.  "I'll
have to dictate that message all over again."

"Yes, general," returned Junot, quickly, "but you needn't mind that.
There will be no extra charge.  It's really my fault.  I should have
brought an umbrella."

"You are a noble fellow," said Napoleon, grasping his hand and
squeezing it warmly.  "In the heyday of my prosperity, if my
prosperity ever goes a-haying, I shall remember you.  Your name?"

"Junot, General," was the reply.

Bonaparte frowned.  "Ha! ha!" he laughed, acridly.  "You jest, eh?
Well, Junot, when I am Jupiter I'll reward you."

Later on, discovering his error, Bonaparte made a memorandum
concerning Junot, which was the first link in the chain which
ultimately bound the stenographer to fame as a marshal of France.

There have been various other versions of this anecdote, but this is
the only correct one, and is now published for the first time on the
authority of M. le Comte de B--, whose grandfather was the bass
drummer upon whose drum Junot was writing the now famous letter, and
who was afterwards ennobled by Napoleon for his services in Egypt,
where, one dark, drizzly night, he frightened away from Bonaparte's
tent a fierce band of hungry lions by pounding vigorously upon his
instrument.

About this time Napoleon, who had been spelling his name in various
ways, and particularly with a "u," as Buonaparte, decided to settle
finally upon one form of designation.

"People are beginning to bother the life out of me with requests for
my autograph," he said to Bourrienne, "and it is just as well that I
should settle on one.  If I don't, they'll want me to write out a
complete set of them, and I haven't time to do that."

"Buonaparte is a good-looking name," suggested Bourrienne.  "It is
better than Bona Parte, as you sometimes call yourself.  If you
settle on Bona Parte, you'd have really three names; and as you don't
write society verse for the comic papers, what's the use?  Newspaper
reporters will refer to you as Napoleon B. Parte or N. Bona Parte,
and the public hates a man who parts his name in the middle.  Parte
is a good name in its way, but it's too short and abrupt.  Few men
with short, sharp, decisive names like that ever make their mark.
Let it be Buonaparte, which is sort of high-sounding--it makes a
mouthful, as it were."

"If I drop the 'u' the autograph will be shorter, and I'll gain time
writing it," said Napoleon.  "It shall be Bonaparte without 'u.'"

"Humph!" ejaculated Bourrienne.  "Bonaparte without me!  I like that.
Might as well talk of Dr. Johnson without Boswell."

Bonaparte now went to Nice as chief of batallion in the army of
Italy; but having incurred the displeasure of a suspicious home
government, he was shortly superseded, and lived in retirement with
his family at Marseilles for a brief time.  Here he fell in love
again, and would have married Mademoiselle Clery, whom he afterwards
made Queen of Sweden, had he not been so wretchedly poor.

"This, my dear," he said, sadly, to Mademoiselle Clery, "is the
beastly part of being the original ancestor of a family instead of a
descendant.  I've got to make the fortune which will enrich
posterity, while I'd infinitely prefer having a rich uncle somewhere
who'd have the kindness to die and leave me a million.  There's
Joseph--lucky man.  He's gone and got married.  He can afford it.  He
has me to fall back on, but I--I haven't anybody to fall back on, and
so, for the second time in my life, must give up the only girl I ever
loved."

With these words Napoleon left Mademoiselle Clery, and returned to
Paris in search of employment.

"If there's nothing else to do, I can disguise myself as a Chinaman
and get employment in Madame Sans Gene's laundry," he said.  "There's
no disgrace in washing, and in that way I may be able to provide
myself with decent linen, anyhow.  Then I shall belong to the
laundered aristocracy, as the English have it."

But greater things than this awaited Napoleon at Paris.  Falling in
with Barras, a member of the Convention which ruled France at this
time, he learned that the feeling for the restoration of the monarchy
was daily growing stronger, and that the royalists of Paris were a
great menace to the Convention.

"They'll mob us the first thing we know," said Barras.  "The members
look to me to save them in case of attack, but I must confess I'd
like to sublet the contract."

"Give it to me, then.  I'm temporarily out of a job," said Napoleon,
"and the life I'm leading is killing me.  If it weren't for Talma's
kindness in letting me lead his armies on the stage at the Odeon,
with a turn at scene-shifting when they are not playing war dramas, I
don't know what I'd do for my meals; and even when I do get a
sandwich ahead occasionally I have to send it to Marseilles to my
mother.  Give me your contract, and if I don't save your Convention
you needn't pay me a red franc.  I hate aristocrats, and I hate mobs;
and this being an aristocratic mob, I'll go into the work with
enthusiasm."

"You!" cried Barras.  "A man of your size, or lack of it, save the
Convention from a mob of fifty thousand?  Nonsense!"

"Did you ever hear that little slang phrase so much in vogue in
America," queried Napoleon, coldly fixing his eye on Barras--"a
phrase which in French runs, 'Petit, mais O Moi'--or, as they have
it, 'Little, but O My'?  Well, that is me. {1}  Besides, if I am
small, there is less chance of my being killed, which will make me
more courageous in the face of fire than one of your bigger men would
be."

"I will put my mind on it," said Barras, somewhat won over by
Napoleon's self-confidence.

"Thanks," said Napoleon; "and now come into the cafe and have dinner
with me."

"Save your money, Bonaparte," said Barras.  "You can't afford to pay
for your own dinner, much less mine."

"That's precisely why I want you to dine with me," returned Napoleon.
"If I go alone, they won't serve me because they know I can't pay.
If I go in with you, they'll give me everything they've got on the
supposition that you will pay the bill.  Come!  En avant!"

"Vous etes un bouchonnier, vraiment!" said Barras, with a laugh.

"A what?" asked Napoleon, not familiar with the idiom.

"A corker!" explained Barras.

"Very good," said Napoleon, his face lighting up.  "If you'll order a
bottle of Burgundy with the bird I will show you that I am likewise
something of an uncorker."

This readiness on Napoleon's part in the face of difficulty
completely captured Barras, and as a result the young adventurer had
his first real chance to make an impression on Paris, where, on the
13th Vendemiaire (or October 4, 1795), he literally obliterated the
forces of the Sectionists, whose success in their attack upon the
Convention would have meant the restoration of the Bourbons to the
throne of France.  Placed in command of the defenders of the
Convention, Napoleon with his cannon swept the mob from the four
broad avenues leading to the palace in which the legislators sat.

"Don't fire over their heads," said he to his gunners, as the mob
approached.  "Bring our arguments right down to their comprehension,
and remember that the comprehension of a royalist is largely affected
by his digestion.  Therefore, gunners, let them have it there.  If
these assassins would escape appendicitis they would better avoid the
grape I send them."

The result is too well known to need detailed description here.
Suffice it to say that Bonaparte's attentions to the digestive
apparatus of the rioters were so effective that, in token of their
appreciation of his services, the Convention soon afterwards placed
him in command of the Army of the Interior.

Holding now the chief military position in Paris, Bonaparte was much
courted by every one, but he continued his simple manner of living as
of yore, overlooking his laundry and other bills as unostentatiously
as when he had been a poor and insignificant subaltern, and daily
waxing more taciturn and prone to irritability.

"You are becoming gloomy, General," said Barras one morning, as the
two men breakfasted.  "It is time for you to marry and become a
family man."

"Peste!" said Napoleon, "man of family!  It takes too long--it is
tedious.  Families are delightful when the children are grown up; but
I could not endure them in a state of infancy."

"Ah!" smiled Barras, significantly.  "But suppose I told you of a
place where you could find a family ready made?"

Napoleon at once became interested.

"I should marry it," he said, "for truly I do need some one to look
after my clothing, particularly now that, as a man of high rank, my
uniforms hold so many buttons."

Thus it happened that Barras took the young hero to a reception at
the house of Madame Tallien, where he introduced him to the lovely
widow, Josephine de Beauharnais, and her two beautiful children.

"There you are, Bonaparte," he whispered, as they entered the room;
"there is the family complete--one wife, one son, one daughter.  What
more could you want?  It will be yours if you ask for it, for Madame
de Beauharnais is very much in love with you."

"Ha!" said Napoleon.  "How do you know that?"

"She told me so," returned Barras.

"Very well," said Napoleon, making up his mind on the instant.  "I
will see if I can involve her in a military engagement."

Which, as the world knows, he did; and on the 9th of March, 1796,
Napoleon and Josephine were united, and the happy groom, writing to
his mother, announcing his marriage to "the only woman he ever
loved," said:  "She is ten years older than I, but I can soon
overcome that.  The opportunities for a fast life in Paris are
unequalled, and I have an idea that I can catch up with her in six
months if the Convention will increase my salary."



CHAPTER V:  ITALY--MILAN--VIENNA--VENICE
1796-1797



After a honeymoon of ten days Napoleon returned to work.  Assuming
command of the army of Italy, he said:  "I am at last in business for
myself.  Keep your eyes on me, Bourrienne, and you'll wear blue
goggles.  You'll have to, you'll be so dazzled.  We will set off at
once for Italy.  The army is in wretched shape.  It lacks shoes,
clothes, food.  It lacks everything.  I don't think it even has
sense.  If it had it would strike for lower wages."

"Lower wages?" queried Bourrienne.  "You mean higher, don't you?"

"Not I," said Bonaparte.  "They couldn't collect higher wages, but if
their pay was reduced they might get it once in a while.  We can
change all this, however, by invading Italy.  Italy has all things to
burn, from statuary to Leghorn hats.  In three months we shall be at
Milan.  There we can at least provide ourselves with fine collections
of oil-paintings.  Meantime let the army feed on hope and wrap
themselves in meditation.  It's poor stuff, but there's plenty of it,
and it's cheap.  On holidays give the poor fellows extra rations, and
if hope does not sustain them, cheer them up with promises of drink.
Tell them when we get to Italy they can drink in the scenery in
unstinted measure, and meanwhile keep the band playing merrily.
There's nothing like music to drive away hunger.  I understand that
the lamented king's appetite was seriously affected by the
Marseillaise."

To his soldiers he spoke with equal vigor.

"Soldiers," he said, "sartorially speaking, you are a poor lot; but
France does not want a tailor-made army at this juncture.  We are not
about to go on dress parade, but into grim-visaged war, and the
patches on your trousers, if you present a bold front to the enemy,
need never be seen.  You are also hungry, but so am I.  I have had no
breakfast for four hours.  The Republic owes you much; but money is
scarce, and you must whistle for your pay.  The emigres have gone
abroad with all the circulating medium they could lay their hands on,
and the Government has much difficulty in maintaining the gold
reserve.  For my part, I prefer fighting for glory to whistling for
money.  Fighting is the better profession.  You are men.  Leave
whistling to boys.  Follow me into Italy, where there are fertile
plains--plains from whose pregnant soil the olive springs at the rate
of a million bottles a year, plains through whose lovely lengths
there flow rivers of Chianti.  Follow me to Italy, where there are
opulent towns with clothing-stores on every block, and churches
galore, with their poor-boxes bursting with gold.  Soldiers, can you
resist the alluring prospect?"

"Vive l'Empereur!" cried the army, with one voice.

Napoleon frowned.

"Soldiers!" he cried, "Remember this:  you are making history;
therefore, pray be accurate.  I am not yet Emperor, and you are
guilty of an anachronism of a most embarrassing sort.  Some men make
history in a warm room with pen and ink, aided by guide-books and
collections of anecdotes.  Leave anachronisms and inaccuracies to
them.  For ourselves, we must carve it out with our swords and
cannon; we must rubricate our pages with our gore, and punctuate our
periods with our bayonets.  Let it not be said by future ages that we
held our responsibilities lightly and were careless of facts, and to
that end don't refer to me as Emperor until you are more familiar
with dates.  When we have finished with Italy I'll take you to the
land where dates grow.  Meanwhile, restez tranquille, as they say in
French, and breathe all the air you want.  France can afford you that
in unstinted measure."

"Vive Bonaparte!" cried the army, taking the rebuke in good part.

"Now you're shouting," said Napoleon, with a smile.  "You're a good
army, and if you stick by me you'll wear diamonds."

"We have forgotten one thing," said Barras a few days later, on the
eve of Napoleon's departure.  "We haven't any casus belli."

"What's that?" said Napoleon, who had been so busy with his
preparations that he had forgotten most of his Greek and Latin.

"Cause for war," said Barras.  "Where were you educated?  If you are
going to fight the Italians you've got to have some principle to
fight for."

"That's precisely what we are going to fight for," said Napoleon.
"We're a bankrupt people.  We're going to get some principal to set
us up in business.  We may be able to float some bonds in Venice."

"True," returned Barras; "but that, after all, is mere highway
robbery."

"Well, all I've got to say," retorted Napoleon, with a sneer--"all
I've got to say is that if your Directory can't find something in the
attitude of Italy towards the Republic to take offence at, the sooner
it goes out of business the better.  I'll leave that question
entirely to you fellows at Paris.  I can't do everything.  You look
after the casus, and I'll take care of the belli."

This plan was adopted.  The Directory, after discussing various
causes for action, finally decided that an attack on Italy was
necessary for three reasons.  First, because the alliance between the
kings of Sardinia and Austria was a menace to the Republic, and must
therefore be broken.  Second, the Austrians were too near the Rhine
for France's comfort, and must be diverted before they had drunk all
the wine of the country, of which the French were very fond; and,
third, His Holiness the Pope had taken little interest in the now
infidel France, and must therefore be humiliated.  These were the
reasons for the war settled upon by the government, and as they were
as satisfactory to Napoleon as any others, he gave the order which
set the army of Italy in motion.

"How shall we go, General?" asked Augereau, one of his subordinates.
"Over the Alps?"

"Not this time," returned Napoleon.  "It is too cold.  The army has
no ear-tabs.  We'll skirt the Alps, and maybe the skirt will make
them warmer."

This the army proceeded at once to do, and within a month the first
object of the war was accomplished.

The Sardinian king was crushed, and the army found itself in
possession of food, drink, and clothes to a surfeit.  Bonaparte's
pride at his success was great but not over-weening.

"Soldiers!" he cried, "you have done well.  So have I.  Hannibal
crossed the Alps.  We didn't; but we got here just the same.  You
have provided yourselves with food and clothes, and declared a
dividend for the Treasury of France which will enable the Directory
to buy itself a new hat through which to address the people.  You
have reason to be proud of yourselves.  Pat yourselves on your backs
with my compliments, but remember one thing.  Our tickets are to
Milan, and no stop-overs are allowed.  Therefore, do not as yet relax
your efforts.  Milan is an imperial city.  The guide-books tell us
that its cathedral is a beauty, the place is full of pictures, and
the opera-house finished in 1779 is the largest in the world.  It can
be done in two days, and the hotels are good.  Can you, therefore,
sleep here?"

"No, no!" cried the army.

"Then," cried Napoleon, tightening his reins and lifting his horse on
to its hind-legs and holding his sword aloft, "A Milan!"

"How like a statue he looks," said Lannes, admiringly.

"Yes," replied Augereau, "you'd think he was solid brass."

The Austrian troops were now concentrated behind the Po, but Napoleon
soon outgeneralled their leaders, drove them back to the Adda, and
himself pushed on to the Bridge of Lodi, which connected the east and
west branches of that river.

"When I set out for the P. O. P. E.," said Napoleon, "I'm not going
to stop halfway and turn back at the P. O.  We've got the Austrians
over the Adda, and that's just where we want them.  I had a dream
once about the Bridge of Lodi, and it's coming true now or never.
We'll take a few of our long divisions, cross the Adda, and subtract
a few fractions of the remainder now left the Austrians.  This will
destroy their enthusiasm, and Milan will be ours."

The words were prophetic, for on the 10th of May the French did
precisely what their commander had said they would do, and on the
fourteenth day of May the victorious French entered Milan, the
wealthy capital of Lombardy.

"Curious fact," said Napoleon.  "In times of peace if a man needs a
tonic you give him iron, and it builds him up; but in war if you give
the troops iron it bowls 'em down.  Look at those Austrians; they've
got nervous prostration of the worst sort."

"They got too much iron," said Lannes.

"Too much tonic is worse than none.  A man can stand ten or twenty
grains of iron, but forty pounds is rather upsetting."

"True," acquiesced Napoleon.  "Well, it was a great fight, and I have
only one regret.  I do wish you'd had a Kodak to take a few snap-
shots of me at that Bridge of Lodi.  I'd like to send some home to
the family.  It would have reminded brother Joseph of old times to
see me dashing over that bridge, prodding its planks with my heels
until it fairly creaked with pain.  It would have made a good
frontispiece for Bourrienne's book too.  And now, my dear Lannes,
what shall we do with ourselves for the next five days?  Get out your
Baedecker and let us see this imperial city of the Lombards."

"There's one matter we must arrange first," said Augereau; "we
haven't any stable accommodations to speak of."

"What's the matter with the stalls at the opera-house?" suggested
Napoleon.  "As I told the troops the other day, it's the biggest
theatre in the world.  You ought to be able to stable the horses
there and lodge the men in the boxes."

"The horses would look well sitting in orchestra chairs, wouldn't
they?" said Augereau.  "It's not feasible.  As for the boxes, they're
mostly held by subscribers."

"Then stable them in the picture-galleries," said the general.  "It
will be good discipline."

"The people will call that sacrilege," returned Augereau.

"Not if we remove the pictures," said Bonaparte.  "We'll send the
pictures to Paris."

Accordingly this was done, and the galleries of France were thereby
much enriched.  We mention these details at length, because Napoleon
has been severely criticised for thus impoverishing Italy, as well as
for his so-called contempt of art--a criticism which, in the face of
this accurate version, must fall to the ground.  The pictures were
sent by him to Paris merely to preserve them, and, as he himself
said, a propos of the famous Da Vinci, beneath which horses and men
alike were quartered:  "I'd have sent that too, but to do it I'd have
had to send the whole chapel or scrape the picture off the wall.
These Italians should rather thank than condemn me for leaving it
where it was.  Mine was not an army of destruction, but a Salvation
Army of the highest type."

"You made mighty few converts for a Salvation Army," said Talleyrand,
to whom this remark was addressed.

"That's where you are wrong," said Napoleon.  "I made angels of
innumerable Austrians, and converted quite a deal of Italian into
French territory."

It was hardly to be doubted that Napoleon's successes would arouse
jealousies in Paris, and the Directory, fearing the hold the
victorious general was acquiring upon the people, took steps to limit
his powers.  Bonaparte instantly resigned his command and threatened
to return to Paris, which so frightened the government that they
refused to accept his resignation.

From this time on for nearly a year Napoleon's career was a
succession of victories.  He invaded the Papal States, and acquired
millions of francs and hundreds of pictures.  He chastised all who
opposed his sway, and, after pursuing the Austrians as far as Leoben,
within sight of Vienna, he humbled the haughty Emperor Joseph.

"I'll recognize your Republic," said the Emperor at last, finding
that there was nothing else to be done.

"Thanks," said Napoleon--"I thought you would; but I don't know
whether the Republic will recognize you.  She doesn't even know you
by sight."

"Is that all you want?" asked the Emperor, anxiously.

"For the present, yes.  Some day I may come back for something else,"
returned Napoleon, significantly.  "And, by-the-way, when you are
sending your card to the French people just enclose a small
remittance of a few million francs, not necessarily for publication,
but as a guarantee of good faith.  Don't send all you've got, but
just enough.  You may want to marry off one of your daughters some
day, and it will be well to save something for her dowry."

It was in little acts of this nature that Napoleon showed his
wonderful foresight.  One would almost incline to believe from this
particular incident that Bonaparte foresaw the Marie-Louise episode
in his future career.

The Austrians humbled, Napoleon turned his attention to Venice.
Venice had been behaving in a most exasperating fashion, and the
conqueror felt that the time had come to take the proud City of the
Sea in hand.

"If the Venetians have any brains," said he to Bourrienne, who joined
him about this time, secretly representing, it is said, a newspaper-
syndicate service, "they'll put on all the sail they've got and take
their old city out to sea.  They're in for the worst ducking they
ever got."

"I'm afraid you'll find them hard to get at," said Bourrienne.  "That
lagoon is a wet place."

"Oh, as for that," said Bonaparte, "a little water will do the army
good.  We've been fighting so hard it's been months since they've had
a good tubbing, and a swim won't hurt them.  Send Lannes here."  In a
few minutes Lannes entered Bonaparte's tent.

"Lannes, we're off for Venice.  Provide the army with overshoes, and
have our luggage checked through," said Bonaparte.

"Yes, General."

"Can Augereau swim?"

"I don't know, General."

"Well, find out, and if he can't we'll get him a balloon."

Thus, taking every precaution for the comfort of his men and the
safety of his officers, Napoleon set out.  Venice, hearing of his
approach, was filled with consternation, and endeavored to temporize.
The Doges offered millions if Bonaparte would turn his attention to
others, to which Napoleon made this spirited reply:  "Venetians, tell
the Doges, with my compliments, that I am coming.  The wealth of the
Indies couldn't change my mind.  They offer me stocks and bonds;
well, I believe their stocks and bonds to be as badly watered as
their haughty city, and I'll have none of them.  I'll bring my stocks
with me, and your Doges will sit in them.  I'll bring my bonds, and
your nobles shall put them on and make them clank.  You've been
drowning Frenchmen every chance you've had.  It will now be my
pleasing duty to make you do a little gurgling on your own account.
You'll find out for the first time in your lives what it is to be in
the swim.  Put on your bathing-suits and prepare for the avenger.
The lions of St. Marc must lick the dust."

"We have no dust, General," said one of the messengers.

"Then you'd better get some," retorted Napoleon, "for you will have
to come down with it to the tune of millions."

True to his promise, Napoleon appeared at the lagoon on the 31st of
May, and the hitherto haughty Venice fell with a splash that could be
heard for miles, first having sent five ships of war, 3,000,000
francs, as many more in naval stores, twenty of her best pictures,
the bronze horses of the famous church, five hundred manuscripts, and
one apology to the French Republic as the terms of peace.  The bronze
horses were subsequently returned, but what became of the manuscripts
we do not know.  They probably would have been returned also--a large
portion of them, at least--if postage-stamps had been enclosed.  This
is mere theory, of course; but it is rendered reasonable by the fact
that this is the usual fate of most manuscripts; nor is there any
record of their having been published in the Moniteur, the only
periodical which the French government was printing at that time.

As for Bonaparte, it was as balm to his soul to humble the haughty
Doges, whose attitude towards him had always been characterized by a
superciliousness which filled him with resentment.

"It did me good," he said, many years after, with a laugh, "to see
those Doges swimming up and down the Grand Canal in their state
robes, trying to look dignified, while I stood on the sidewalk and
asked them why they didn't come in out of the wet."



CHAPTER VI:  MONTEBELLO--PARIS--EGYPT
1797-1799



Josephine now deemed it well to join her lord at Milan.  There had
been so many only women he had ever loved that she was not satisfied
to remain at Paris while he was conducting garden-parties at the
Castle of Montebello.  Furthermore, Bonaparte himself wished her to
be present.

"This Montebello life is, after all, little else than a dress
rehearsal for what is to come," he said, confidentially, to
Bourrienne, "and Josephine can't afford to be absent.  It's a great
business, this being a Dictator and having a court of your own, and
I'm inclined to think I shall follow it up as my regular profession
after I've conquered a little more of the earth."

Surrounded by every luxury, and in receipt for the first time in his
life of a steady income, Bonaparte carried things with a high hand.
He made treaties with various powers without consulting the
Directory, for whom every day he felt a growing contempt.

"What is the use of my consulting the Directory, anyhow?" he asked.
"If it were an Elite Directory it might be worth while, but it isn't.
I shall, therefore, do as I please, and if they don't like what I do
I'll ratify it myself."

Ambassadors waited upon him as though he were a king, and when one
ventured to disagree with the future Emperor he wished he hadn't.
Cobentzel, the envoy of the Austrian ruler, soon discovered this.

"I refuse to accept your ultimatum," said he one day to Napoleon,
after a protracted conference.

"You do, eh?"--said Napoleon, picking up a vase of delicate
workmanship.  "Do you see this jug?"

"Yes," said Cobentzel.

"Well," continued Napoleon, dropping it to the floor, where it was
shattered into a thousand pieces, "do you see it now?"

"I do," said Cobentzel; "what then?"

"It has a mate," said Napoleon, significantly; "and if you do not
accept my ultimatum I'll smash the other one upon your plain but
honest countenance."

Cobentzel accepted the ultimatum.

Bonaparte's contempt for the Directory was beginning to be shared by
a great many of the French, and, to save themselves, the "Five Sires
of the Luxembourg," as the Directory were called, resolved on a
brilliant stroke, which involved no less a venture than the invasion
of England.  Bonaparte, hearing of this, and anxious to see London,
of which he had heard much, left Italy and returned to Paris.

"If there's a free tour of England to be had, Josephine," said he, "I
am the man to have it.  Besides, this climate of Italy is getting
pretty hot for an honest man.  I've refused twenty million francs in
bribes in two weeks.  If they'd offered another sou I'm afraid I'd
have taken it.  I will therefore go to Paris, secure the command of
the army of England, and pay a few of my respects to George Third,
Esq.  I hear a great many English drop their h's; I'll see if I can't
make 'em drop their l. s. d.'s as well."

Arrived in Paris, Bonaparte was much courted by everybody.

"I have arrived," he said, with a grim smile.  "Even my creditors are
glad to see me, and I'll show them that I have not forgotten them by
running up a few more bills."

This he did, going to the same tradesmen that he had patronized in
his days of poverty.  To his hatter, whom he owed for his last five
hats, he said:

"They call me haughty here; they say I am cold.  Well, I am cold.
I've shivered on the Alps several times since I was here last, and it
has chilled my nature.  It has given me the grip, so to speak, and
when I lose my grip the weather will be even colder.   Give me a hat,
my friend."

"What size?" asked the hatter.

"The same," said Bonaparte, with a frown.  "Why do you ask?"

"I was told your head had swelled," returned the hatter, meekly.

"They shall pay for this," murmured Napoleon, angrily.

"I am glad," said the hatter, with a sigh.  "I was wondering who'd
pay for it."

"Oh, you were, eh?" said Napoleon.  "Well, wonder no more.  Get out
your books."

The hatter did so.

"Now charge it," said Napoleon.

"To whom?" asked the hatter.

"Those eminent financiers, Profit & Loss," said Napoleon, with a
laugh, as he left the shop.  "That's what I call a most successful
hat-talk," he added, as he told Bourrienne of the incident later in
the day.

"How jealous they all are!" said Bourrienne.  "The idea of your
having a swelled head is ridiculous."

"Of course," said Napoleon; "all I've got is a proper realization of
'Whom I Am,' as they say in Boston.  But wait, my boy, wait.  When I
put a crown on my head--"

What Bonaparte would have said will never be known, for at that
moment the general's servant announced Mme. Sans Gene, his former
laundress, and that celebrated woman, unconventional as ever, stalked
into the room.  Napoleon looked at her coldly.

"You are--?" he queried.

"Your former laundress," she replied.

"Ah, and you want--?"

"My pay," she retorted.

"I am sorry, madame," said the General, "but the expenses of my
Italian tour have been very great, and I am penniless.  I will,
however, assist you to the full extent of my power.  Here are three
collars and a dress-shirt.  If you will launder them I will wear them
to the state ball to-morrow evening, and will tell all my rich and
influential friends who did them up, and if you wish I will send you
a letter saying that I patronized your laundry once two years ago,
and have since used no other."

These anecdotes, unimportant in themselves, are valuable in that they
refute the charges made against General Bonaparte at this time--
first, that he returned from Egypt with a fortune, and, second, that
he carried himself with a hauteur which rendered him unapproachable.

For various reasons the projected invasion of England was abandoned,
and the expedition to Egypt was substituted.  This pleased Napoleon
equally as well.

"I wasn't stuck on the English invasion, anyhow," he said, in writing
to Joseph.  "In the first place, they wanted me to go in October,
when the London season doesn't commence until spring, and, in the
second place, I hate fogs and mutton-chops.  Egypt is more to my
taste.  England would enervate me.  Egypt, with the Desert of Sahara
in its backyard, will give me plenty of sand, and if you knew what
projects I have in mind--which, of course, you don't, for you never
knew anything, my dear Joseph--you'd see how much of that I need."

The Directory were quite as glad to have Napoleon go to Egypt as he
was to be sent.  Their jealousy of him was becoming more painful to
witness every day.

"If he goes to England," said Barras, "he'll conquer it, sure as
fate; and it will be near enough for excursion steamers to take the
French people over to see him do it.  If that happens we are lost."

"He'll conquer Egypt, though, and he'll tell about it in such a way
that he will appear twice as great," suggested Carnot.  "Seems to me
we'd better sell out at once and be done with it."

"Not so," said Moulin.  "Let him go to Egypt.  Very likely he'll fall
off a pyramid there and break his neck."

"Or get sunstruck," suggested Barras.

"There's no question about it in my mind," said Gohier.  "Egypt is
the place.  If he escapes the pyramids or sunstroke, there are still
the lions and the simoon, not to mention the rapid tides of the Red
Sea.  Why, he just simply can't get back alive.  I vote for Egypt."

Thus it happened that on the 19th day of May, 1798, with an army of
forty thousand men and a magnificant staff of picked officers,
Napoleon embarked for Egypt.

"I'm glad we're off," said he to the sailor who had charge of his
steamer-chair.  "I've got to hurry up and gain some more victories or
these French will forget me.  A man has to make a three-ringed circus
of himself to keep his name before the public these days."

"What are you fightin' for this time, sir?" asked the sailor, who had
not heard that war had been declared--"ile paintin's or pyramids?"

"I am going to free the people of the East from the oppressor," said
Napoleon, loftily.

"And it's a noble work, your honor," said the sailor.  "Who is it
that's oppressin' these people down East?"

"You'll have to consult the Directory," said Napoleon, coldly.
"Leave me; I have other things to think of."

On the 10th of June Malta was reached, and the Knights of St. John,
long disused to labor of any sort, like many other knights of more
modern sort, surrendered in most hospitable fashion, inviting
Napoleon to come ashore and accept the freedom of the island or
anything else he might happen to want.  His reply was characteristic:

"Tell the Knights of Malta to attend to their cats.  I'm after
continents, not islands," said he; and with this, leaving a
detachment of troops to guard his new acquisition, he proceeded to
Alexandria, which he reached on the 1st of July.  Here, in the midst
of a terrible storm and surf, Napoleon landed his forces, and
immediately made a proclamation to the people.

"Fellahs!" he cried, "I have come.  The newspapers say to destroy
your religion.  As usual, they prevaricate.  I have come to free you.
All you who have yokes to shed prepare to shed them now.  I come with
the olive-branch in my hand.  Greet me with outstretched palms.  Do
not fight me for I am come to save you, and I shall utterly
obliterate any man, be he fellah, Moujik, or even the great Marmalade
himself, who prefers fighting to being saved.  We may not look it,
but we are true Mussulmen.  If you doubt it, feel our muscle.  We
have it to burn.  Desert the Mamelukes and be saved.  The Pappylukes
are here."

On reading this proclamation Alexandria immediately fell, and
Bonaparte, using the Koran as a guide-book, proceeded on his way up
the Nile.  The army suffered greatly from the glare and burning of
the sun-scorched sand, and from the myriads of pestiferous insects
that infested the country; but Napoleon cheered them on.  "Soldiers!"
he cried, when they complained, "if this were a summer resort, and
you were paying five dollars a day for a room at a bad hotel, you'd
think yourselves in luck, and you'd recommend your friends to come
here for a rest.  Why not imagine this to be the case now?  Brace up.
We'll soon reach the pyramids, and it's a mighty poor pyramid that
hasn't a shady side.  On to Cairo!"

"It's easy enough for you to talk," murmured one.  "You've got a
camel to ride on and we have to walk."

"Well, Heaven knows," retorted Napoleon, pointing to his camel,
"camel riding isn't like falling off a log.  At first I was carried
away with it, but for the last two days it has made me so sea-sick I
can hardly see that hump."

After this there was no more murmuring, but Bonaparte did not for an
instant relax his good-humor.

"The water is vile," said Dessaix, one morning.

"Why not drink milk, then?" asked the commander.

"Milk!  I'd love to," returned Dessaix; "but where shall I find
milk?"

"At the dairy," said Napoleon, with a twinkle in his eye.

"What dairy?" asked Dessaix, not observing the twinkle.

"The dromedary," said Napoleon, with a roar.

Little incidents like this served to keep the army in good spirits
until the 21st of July, when they came in sight of the pyramids.
Instantly Napoleon called a halt, and the army rested.  The next day,
drawing them up in line, the General addressed them.  "Soldiers!" he
cried, pointing to the pyramids, "from the summits of those pyramids
forty centuries look down upon you.  You can't see them, but they are
there.  No one should look down upon the French, not even a century.
Therefore, I ask you, shall we allow the forces of the Bey, his
fellahs and his Tommylukes, to drive us into the desert of Sahara,
bag and baggage, to subsist on a sea-less seashore for the balance of
our days, particularly when they haven't any wheels on their cannon?"

"No, no!" cried the army.

"Then up sail and away!" cried Bonaparte.  "This is to be no naval
affair, but the army of the Bey awaits us."

"Tell the band to play a Wagner march," he whispered, hastily, to his
aide-de-camp.  "It'll make the army mad, and what we need now is
wrath."

So began the battle of the Pyramids.  The result is too well known to
readers of contemporary history to need detailed statement here.  All
day long it raged, and when night fell Cairo came with it.  Napoleon,
worn out with fatigue, threw himself down on a pyramid to rest.

"Ah!" he said, as he breathed a sigh of relief, "what a glorious day!
We've beat 'em!  Won't the Directory be glad?  M. Barras will be more
M. Barrassed than ever."  Then, turning and tapping on the door of
the massive pile, he whispered, softly:  "Ah!  Ptolemy, my man, it's
a pity you've no windows in this tomb.  You'd have seen a pretty
sight this day.  Kleber," he added, turning to that general, "do you
know why Ptolemy inside this pyramid and I outside of it are alike?"

"I cannot guess, General," said Kleber.  "Why?"

"We're both 'in it'!" returned Napoleon, retiring to his tent.

Later on in the evening, summoning Bourrienne, the victor said to
him:

"Mr. Secretary, I have a new autograph.  If Ptolemy can spell his
name with a 'p,' why shouldn't I?  I'm not going to have history say
that a dead mummy could do things I couldn't.  Pnapoleon would look
well on a state paper."

"No doubt," said Bourrienne; "but every one now says that you copy
Caesar.  Why give them the chance to call you an imitator of Ptolemy
also?"

"True, my friend, true," returned Napoleon, in a tone of
disappointment.  "I had not thought of that.  When you write my
autographs for the children of these Jennylukes--"

"Mamelukes, General," corrected Bourrienne.

"Ah, yes--I always get mixed in these matters--for the children of
these Mamelukes, you may stick to the old form.  Good-night."

And with that the conqueror went to sleep as peacefully as a little
child.

Had Bonaparte now returned to France he would have saved himself much
misery.  King of fire though he had become in the eyes of the
vanquished, his bed was far from being one of roses.

"In a climate like that," he observed, sadly, many years after, "I'd
rather have been an ice baron.  Africa got entirely too hot to cut
any ice with me.  Ten days after I had made my friend Ptolemy turn
over in his grave, Admiral Nelson came along with an English fleet
and challenged our Admiral Brueys to a shooting-match for the
championship of Aboukir Bay.  Brueys, having heard of what magazine
writers call the ships of the desert in my control, supposing them to
be frigates and not camels, imagined himself living in Easy Street,
and accepted the challenge.  He expected me to sail around to the
other side of Nelson, and so have him between two fires.  Well, I
don't go to sea on camels, as you know, and the result was that after
a twenty-four-hour match the camels were the only ships we had left.
Nelson had won the championship, laid the corner-stone of monuments
to himself all over English territory, cut me off from France, and
added three thousand sea-lubbers to my force, for that number of
French sailors managed to swim ashore during the fight.  I manned the
camels with them immediately, but it took them months to get their
land legs on, and the amount of grog they demanded would have made a
quick-sand of the Desert of Sahara, all of which was embarrassing."

But Napoleon did not show his embarrassment to those about him.  He
took upon himself the government of Egypt, opened canals, and
undertook to behave like a peaceable citizen for a while.

"I needed rest, and I got it," he said.  "Sitting on the apex of the
pyramids, I could see the whole world at my feet, and whatever others
may say to the contrary, it was there that I began to get a clear
view of my future.  It seemed to me that from that lofty altitude,
chumming, as I was, with the forty centuries I have already alluded
to, I could see two ways at once, that every glance could penetrate
eternity; but I realize now that what I really got was only a bird's-
eye view of the future.  I didn't see that speck of a St. Helena.  If
I had, in the height of my power I should have despatched an
expedition of sappers and miners to blow it up."

Quiescence might as well be expected of a volcano, however, as from a
man of Bonaparte's temperament, and it was not long before he was
again engaged in warfare, but not with his old success; and finally,
the plague having attacked his army, Bonaparte, too tender-hearted to
see it suffer, leaving opium for the sick and instructions for
Kleber, whom he appointed his successor, set sail for France once
more in September, 1799.

"Remember, Kleber, my boy," he said, in parting, "these Mussulmen are
a queer lot.  Be careful how you treat them.  If you behave like a
Christian you're lost.  I don't want to go back to France, but I
must.  I got a view of the next three years from the top of Cheops
last night just before sunset, and if that view is to be carried out
my presence in Paris is positively required.  The people are tired of
the addresses given by the old Directory, and they're seriously
thinking of getting out a new one, and I want to be on hand either to
edit it or to secure my appointment to some lucrative consulship."

"You!--a man of your genius after a consulship?" queried Kleber,
astonished.

"Yes, I have joined the office-seekers, General; but wait till you
hear what consulship it is.  The American consul-generalship at
London is worth $70,000 a year, but mine--mine in contrast to that is
as golf to muggins."

"And what shall I tell the reporters about that Jaffa business if
they come here?  That poison scandal is sure to come up," queried
Kleber.

"Treat them well.  Tell the truth if you know it, and--ah--invite
them to dinner," said Bonaparte.  "Give them all the delicacies of
the season.  When you serve the poisson, let it be with one 's,' and,
to make assurance doubly sure, flavor the wines with the quickest you
have."

"Quickest what?" asked Kleber, who was slightly obtuse.

"Humph!" sneered Napoleon.  "On second thoughts, if reporters bother
you, take them swimming where the crocodiles are thickest--only
either don't bathe with them yourself, or wear your mail bathing-
suit.  Furthermore, remember that what little of the army is left are
my children."

"What?" cried the obtuse Kleber.  "All those?"

"They are my children, Kleber," said Napoleon, his voice shaking with
emotion.  "I am young to be the head of so large a family, but the
fact remains as I have said.  They may feel badly at my going away
and leaving them even with so pleasing a hired man as yourself, but
comfort them, let them play in the sand all they please, and if they
want to know why papa has gone away, tell them I've gone to Paris to
buy them some candy."

With these words Napoleon embarked, and on the 16th of October Paris
received him with open arms.  That night the members of the Directory
came down with chills and fever.



CHAPTER VII:  THE 19TH BRUMAIRE--CONSUL--THE TUILERIES--CAROLINE
1799



"There is no question about my greatness now," said Napoleon, as he
meditated upon his position.  "Even if the Directory were not jealous
and the people enthusiastic, the number of relatives I have
discovered in the last ten days would show that things are going my
way.  I have had congratulatory messages from 800 aunts, 950 uncles,
and about 3800 needy cousins since my arrival.  It is queer how big a
family a lonely man finds he has when his star begins to twinkle.
Even Joseph is glad see me now, and I am told that the ice-cream men
serve little vanilla Napoleons at all the swell dinners.  Bourrienne,
our time has come!  Get out my most threadbare uniform, fray a few of
my collars at the edges, and shoot a few holes in my hat.  I'll go
out and take a walk along the Avenue de l'Opera, where the people can
see me."

"There isn't any such street in Paris yet, General," said Bourrienne,
getting out his Paris guide-book.

"Well, there ought to be," said Napoleon.

"What streets are there?  I must be seen or I'll be forgotten."

"What's the matter with a lounge in front of the Luxembourg?  That
will make a contrast that can't help affect the populace.  You, the
conqueror, ill-clad, unshaven, and with a hat full of bullet-holes,
walking outside the palace, with the incompetent Directors lodged
comfortably inside, will make a scene that is bound to give the
people food for thought."

"Well said!" cried Bonaparte.  "Here are the pistols go out into the
woods and prepare the hat.  I'll fray the collars."

This was done, and the effect was instantaneous.  The public
perceived the point, and sympathy ran so high that a public dinner
was offered to the returned warrior.

"I have no use for pomp, Mr. Toast-master," he said, as he rose to
speak at this banquet.  "I am not a good after-dinner speaker, but I
want the people of France to know that I am grateful for this meal.
I rise only to express the thanks of a hungry man for this timely
contribution to his inner self, and I wish to add that I should not
willingly have added to the already heavy tax upon the pockets of a
patriotic people by accepting this dinner, if it were not for the
demands of nature.  It is only the direst necessity that brings me
here; for one must eat, and I cannot beg."

These remarks, as may well be imagined, sent a thrill of enthusiasm
throughout France and filled the Directory with consternation.  The
only cloud upon Bonaparte's horizon was a slight coldness which arose
between himself and Josephine.  She had gone to meet him on his
arrival at Frejus, but by some odd mistake took the road to Burgundy,
while Napoleon came by way of Lyons.  They therefore missed each
other.

"I could not help it," she said, when Napoleon jealously chided her.
"I've travelled very little, and the geography of France always did
puzzle me."

"It is common sense that should have guided you, not knowledge of
geography.  When I sail into Port, you sail into Burgundy--you, the
only woman I ever loved!" cried Napoleon, passionately.  "Hereafter,
madame, for the sake of our step-children, be more circumspect.  At
this time I cannot afford a trip to South Dakota for the purpose of a
quiet divorce, nor would a public one pay at this juncture; but I
give you fair warning that I shall not forget this escapade, and once
we are settled in the--the Whatistobe, I shall remember, and another
only woman I have ever loved will dawn upon your horizon."

Bonaparte was now besieged by all the military personages of France.
His home became the Mecca of soldiers of all kinds, and in order to
hold their interest the hero of the day found it necessary to draw
somewhat upon the possessions which the people were convinced he was
without.  Never an admirer of consistency, France admired this more
than ever.  It was a paradox that this poverty-stricken soldier
should entertain so lavishly, and the people admired the nerve which
prompted him to do it, supposing, many of them, that his creditors
were men of a speculative nature, who saw in the man a good-paying
future investment.

Thus matters went until the evening of the 17th Brumaire, when
Napoleon deemed that he had been on parade long enough, and that the
hour demanded action.

"This is the month of Bromide," he said.

"Brumaire," whispered Bourrienne.

"I said Bromide," retorted Napoleon, "and the people are asleep.
Bromide has that effect.  That is why I call it Bromide, and I have
as much right to name my months as any one else.  Wherefore I repeat,
this is the month of Bromide, and the people are asleep!  I will now
wake them up.  The garrisons of Paris and the National Guard have
asked me to review them, and I'm going to do it, and I've a new set
of tictacs."

"Tactics, General, tactics," implored Bourrienne.

"There is no use discussing words, Mr. Secretary," retorted
Bonaparte.  "It has always been the criticism of my opponents that I
didn't know a tactic from a bedtick--well, perhaps I don't; and for
that reason I am not going to talk about tactics with which I am not
familiar, but I shall speak of tictacs, which is a game I have played
from infancy, and of which I am a master.  I'm going to get up a new
government, Bourrienne.  Summon all the generals in town, including
Bernadotte.  They're all with me except Bernadotte, and he'll be so
unpleasant about what I tell him to do that he'll make all the others
so mad they'll stick by me through thick and thin.  If there's any
irritating work to be done, let Joseph do it.  He has been well
trained in the art of irritation.  I have seen Sieyes and Ducos, and
have promised them front seats in the new government which my tictacs
are to bring about.  Barras won't have the nerve to oppose me, and
Gohier and Moulin have had the ague for weeks.  We'll have the
review, and my first order to the troops will be to carry humps; the
second will be to forward march; and the third will involve the
closing of a long lease, in my name, of the Luxembourg Palace, with a
salary connected with every room in the house."

It is needless for us to go into details.  The review came off as
Napoleon wished, and his orders were implicitly obeyed, with the
result that on the 19th of Brumaire the Directory was filed away, and
Napoleon Bonaparte, with Sieyes and Ducos as fellow-consuls, were
called upon to save France from anarchy.

"Well, Josephine," said Bonaparte, on the evening of the 19th, as he
put his boots outside of the door of his new apartment in the
Luxembourg, "this is better than living in a flat, and I must confess
I find the feather-beds of the palace more inviting than a couch of
sand under a date-tree in Africa."

"And what are you going to do next?" asked Josephine.

"Ha!" laughed Napoleon, blowing out the candle.  "There's a woman's
curiosity for you!  The continuation of this entertaining story, my
love, will be found in volume two of Bourrienne's attractive history,
From the Tow-path to the Tuileries, now in course of preparation, and
for sale by all accredited agents at the low price of ten francs a
copy."

With this remark Napoleon jumped into bed, and on the authority of M.
le Comte de Q-, at this time Charge a Affaires of the Luxembourg, and
later on Janitor of the Tuileries, was soon dreaming of the Empire.

The Directory overthrown, Bonaparte turned his attention to the
overthrow of the Consulate.

"Gentlemen," he said to his fellow-consuls, "I admire you personally
very much, and no doubt you will both of you agree in most matters,
but as I am fearful lest you should disagree on matters of
importance, and so break that beautiful friendship which I am pleased
to see that you have for each other, I shall myself cast a deciding
vote in all matters, large or small.  This will enable you to avoid
differences, and to continue in that spirit of amity which I have
always so much admired in your relations.  You can work as hard as
you please, but before committing yourselves to anything, consult me,
not each other.  What is a Consul for if not for a consultation?"

Against this Sieyes and Ducos were inclined to rebel, but Bonaparte
soon dispelled their opposition.  Ringing his bell, he summoned an
aide-de-camp, whispered a few words in his ear, and then leaned
quietly back in his chair.  The aide-de-camp retired, and two minutes
later the army stationed without began shouting most enthusiastically
for Bonaparte.  The General walked to the window and bowed, and the
air was rent with huzzas and vivas.

"I guess he's right," whispered Sieyes, as the shouting grew more and
more vigorous.

"Guess again," growled Ducos.

"You were saying, gentlemen--?" said Bonaparte, returning.

"That we are likely to have rain before long," said Sieyes, quickly.

"I shouldn't be surprised," returned Napoleon, "and I'd advise you
laymen to provide yourselves with umbrellas when the rain begins.  I,
as a soldier, shall not feel the inclemency of the weather that is
about to set in.  And, by-the-way, Sieyes, please prepare a new
Constitution for France, providing for a single-headed commission to
rule the country.  Ducos, you need rest.  Pray take a vacation until
further notice; I'll attend to matters here.  On your way down-stairs
knock at Bourrienne's door, and tell him I want to see him.  I have a
few more memoirs for his book."

With these words Bonaparte adjourned the meeting.  Sieyes went home
and drew up the Constitution, and M. Ducos retired to private life
for rest.  The Constitution of Sieyes was a clever instrument, but
Bonaparte rendered it unavailing.  It provided for three consuls, but
one of them was practically given all the power, and the others
became merely his clerks.

"This is as it should be," said Bonaparte, when by 4,000,000 votes
the Constitution was ratified by the people.  "These three-headed
governments are apt to be failures, particularly when two of the
heads are worthless.  Cambaceres makes a first-rate bottle-holder,
and Lebrun is a competent stenographer, but as for directing France
in the line of her destiny they are of no use.  I will now move into
the Tuileries.  I hate pomp, as I have often said, but Paris must be
dazzled.  We can't rent the palace for a hotel, and it's a pity to
let so much space go to waste.  Josephine, pack up your trunk, and
tell Bourrienne to have a truckman here at eleven sharp.  To-morrow
night we will dine at the Tuileries, and for Heaven's sake see to it
that the bottles are cold and the birds are hot.  For the sake of the
Republic also, that we may not appear too ostentatious in our living,
you may serve cream with the demi-tasse."

Once established in the Tuileries, Bonaparte became in reality the
king, and his family who had for a long time gone a-begging began to
assume airs of importance, which were impressive.  His sisters began
to be invited out, and were referred to by the society papers as most
eligible young persons.  Their manner, however, was somewhat in
advance of their position.  Had their brother been actually king and
themselves of royal birth they could not have conducted themselves
more haughtily.  This was never so fully demonstrated as when, at a
ball given in their honor at Marseilles, an old friend of the family
who had been outrageously snubbed by Caroline, asked her why she wore
her nose turned up so high.

"Because my brother is reigning in Paris," she retorted.

In this she but voiced the popular sentiment, and the remark was
received with applause; and later, Murat, who had distinguished
himself as a military man, desirous of allying himself with the
rising house, demanded her hand in marriage.

"You?" cried the First Consul.  "Why, Murat, your father kept an
inn."

"I know it," said Murat.  "But what of that?"

"My blood must not be mixed with yours, that's what," said Bonaparte.

"Very well, Mr. Bonaparte," said Murat, angrily, "let it be so; but I
tell you one thing:  When you see the bills Caroline is running up
you'll find it would have been money in your pocket to transfer her
to me.  As for the inn business, my governor never served such
atrocious meals at his table-d'hote as you serve to your guests at
state banquets, and don't you forget it."

Whether these arguments overcame Bonaparte's scruples or not is not
known, but a few days later he relented, and Caroline became the wife
of Murat.

"I never regretted it," said Bonaparte, some years later.  "Murat was
a good brother-in-law to me, and he taught me an invaluable lesson in
the giving of state banquets, which was that one portion is always
enough for three.  And as for parting with my dear sister, that did
not disturb me very much; for, truly, Talleyrand, Caroline was the
only woman I never loved."



CHAPTER VIII:  THE ALPS--THE EMPIRE--THE CORONATION
1800-1804



"Observe," said Bonaparte, now that he was seated on the consular
throne, "that one of my biographers states that, under a man of
ordinary vigor this new Constitution of Sieyes and another our
government would be free and popular, but that under myself it has
become an unlimited monarchy.  That man is right.  I am now a
potentate of the most potent kind.  I got a letter from the Bourbons
last night requesting me to restore them to the throne.  Two years
ago they wouldn't have given me their autographs for my collection,
but now they want me to get up from my seat in this car of state and
let them sit down."

"And you replied--?" asked Josephine.

"That I didn't care for Bourbon--rye suits me better," laughed the
Consul, "unless I can get Scotch, which I prefer at all times.
Feeling this way, I cannot permit Louis to come back yet awhile.
Meantime, in the hope of replenishing our cellars with a few bottles
of Glenlivet, I will write a letter of pacification to George III.,
one of the most gorgeous rex in Madame Tussaud's collection of living
potentates."

This Bonaparte did, asking the English king if he hadn't had enough
war for the present.  George, through the eyes of his ministers,
perceived Bonaparte's point, and replied that he was very desirous
for peace himself, but that at present the market seemed to be
cornered, and that therefore the war must go on.  This reply amused
Napoleon.

"It suits me to the ground," he said, addressing Talleyrand.  "A year
of peace would interfere materially with my future.  If Paris were
Philadelphia, it would be another thing.  There one may rest--there
is no popular demand for excitement--Penn was mightier than the
sword--but here one has to be in a broil constantly; to be a chef one
must be eternally cooking, and the results must be of the kind that
requires extra editions of the evening papers.  The day the newsboys
stop shouting my name, my sun will set for the last time.  Even now
the populace are murmuring, for nothing startling has occurred this
week, which reminds me, I wish to see Fouche.  Send him here."

Talleyrand sent for the Minister of Police, who responded to the
summons.

"Fouche," said Bonaparte, sternly, "what are we here for, salary or
glory?"

"Glory, General."

"Precisely.  Now, as head of the Police Department, are you aware
that no attempt to assassinate me has been made for two weeks?"

"Yes, General, but--"

"Has the assassin appropriation run out?  Have the assassins struck
for higher wages, or are you simply careless?" demanded the First
Consul.  "I warn you, sir, that I wish no excuses, and I will add
that unless an attempt is made on my life before ten o'clock to-
night, you lose your place.  The French people must be kept
interested in this performance, and how the deuce it is to be done
without advertising I don't know.  Go, and remember that I shall be
at home to assassins on Thursdays of alternate weeks until further
notice."

"Your Consulship's wishes shall be respected," said Fouche, with a
low bow.  "But I must say one word in my own behalf.  You were to
have had a dynamite bomb thrown at you yesterday by one of my
employes, but the brave fellow who was to have stood between you and
death disappointed me.  He failed to turn up at the appointed hour,
and so, of course, the assault didn't come off."

"Couldn't you find a substitute?" demanded Bonaparte.

"I could not," said Fouche.  "There aren't many persons in Paris who
care for that kind of employment.  They'd rather shovel snow."

"You are a gay stage-manager, you are!" snapped Bonaparte.  "My
brother Joseph is in town, and yet you say you couldn't find a man to
be hit by a bomb.  Leave me, Fouche.  You give me the ennuis."

Fouche departed with Talleyrand, to whom he expressed his indignation
at the First Consul's reprimand.

"He insists upon an attempted assassination every week," he said;
"and I tell you, Talleyrand, it isn't easy to get these things up.
The market is long on real assassins, fellows who'd kill him for the
mere fun of hearing his last words, but when it comes to playing to
the galleries with a mock attempt with real consequences to the
would-be murderers, they fight shy of it."

Nevertheless, Fouche learned from the interview with Bonaparte that
the First Consul was not to be trifled with, and hardly a day passed
without some exciting episode in this line, in which, of course,
Napoleon always came out unscathed and much endeared to the populace.
This, however, could not go on forever.  The fickle French soon
wearied of the series of unsuccessful attempts on the Consul's life,
and some began to suspect the true state of affairs.

"They're on to our scheme, General," said Fouche, after a while.
"You've got to do something new."

"What would you suggest?" asked Napoleon, wearily.

"Can't you write a book of poems, or a three-volume novel?" suggested
Talleyrand.

"Or resign, and let Sieyes run things for a while?" said Fouche.  "If
they had another Consul for a few months, they'd appreciate what a
vaudeville show they lost in you."

"I'd rather cross the Alps," said Bonaparte.  "I don't like to
resign.  Moving is such a nuisance, and I must say I find the
Tuileries a very pleasant place of abode.  It's more fun than you can
imagine rummaging through the late king's old bureau-drawers.
Suppose I get up a new army and lead it over the Alps."

"Just the thing," said Talleyrand.  "Only it will be a very snowy
trip."

"I'm used to snow-balls," said Napoleon, his mind reverting to the
episode which brought his career at Brienne to a close.  "Just order
an army and a mule and I'll set out.  Meanwhile, Fouche, see that the
Bourbons have a conspiracy to be unearthed in time for the Sunday
newspapers every week during my absence.  I think it would be well,
too, to keep a war-correspondent at work in your office night and
day, writing despatches about my progress.  Give him a good book on
Hannibal's trip to study, and let him fill in a column or two every
day with anecdotes about myself, and at convenient intervals
unsuccessful attempts to assassinate Josephine may come in handy.
Let it be rumored often that I have been overwhelmed by an avalanche-
-in short, keep the interest up."

So it was that Bonaparte set out upon his perilous expedition over
the Great St. Bernard.  On the 15th day of May, 1800, the task of
starting the army in motion was begun, and on the 18th every column
was in full swing.  Lannes, with an advance guard armed with snow-
shovels, took the lead, and Bonaparte, commanding the rear guard of
35,000 men and the artillery, followed.

"Soldiers!" he cried, as they came near to the snow-bound heights,
"we cannot have our plum-cake without its frosting.  Like children,
we will have the frosting first and the cake later.  Lannes and his
followers have not cleaned the snow off as thoroughly as I had hoped,
but I fancy he has done the best he can, and it is not for us to
complain.  Let us on.  The up-trip will be cold and tedious, but once
on the summit of yonder icy ridge we can seat ourselves comfortably
on our guns and slide down into the lovely valleys on the other side
like a band of merry school-boys on toboggans.  Above all, do not
forget the chief duty of a soldier in times of peril.  In spite of
the snow and the ice, in spite of the blizzard and the sleet, keep
cool; and, furthermore, remember that in this climate, if your ears
don't hurt, it's a sign they are freezing.  En avant!  Nous sommes le
peuple."

The army readily responded to such hopeful words, and as Bonaparte
manifested quite as much willingness to walk as the meanest soldier,
disdaining to ride, except occasionally, and even then on the back of
a mule, he became their idol.

"He does not spare himself any more than he does us," said one of his
soldiers, "and he can pack a snow-ball with the best of us."

The General catered, too, to the amusement of his troops, and the
brasses of the band broke the icy stillness of the great hills
continually.

"Music's the thing," he cried, many years later, "and when we got to
the top we had the most original roof-garden you ever saw.  It was
most inspiring, and the only thing that worried me at all was as to
how Fouche was conducting our anecdote and assassination enterprise
at home.  Once on top of the Alps, the descent was easy.  We simply
lay down on our arms and slid.  Down the mountain-side we thundered,
and the Austrians, when they observed our impetus, gave way before
us, and the first thing I knew I skated slam-bang into the Empire.
Our avalanchian descent subjugated Italy; frightened the Englishmen
to Alexandria, where, in the absence of a well-organized force, they
managed to triumph; scared the Pope so thoroughly that he was willing
to sign anything I wished; and, best of all, after a few petty
delays, convinced the French people that I was too big a man for a
mere consulship.  It was my chamois-like agility in getting down the
Alps that really made me Emperor.  As for the army, it fought nobly.
It was so thoroughly chilled by the Alpine venture that it fought
desperately to get warm.  My grenadiers, congealed to their very
souls, went where the fire was hottest.  They seized bomb-shells
while they were yet in the air, warmed their hands upon them, and
then threw them back into the enemy's camp, where they exploded with
great carnage.  They did not even know when they were killed, so
benumbed by the cold had they become.  In short, those days on the
Alps made us invincible.  No wonder, then, that in 1804, when I got
permanently back to Paris, I found the people ready for an emperor!
They were bloody years, those from 1800 to 1804, but it was not
entirely my fault.  I shed very little myself, but the English and
the Austrians and the royalist followers would have it so, and I had
to accommodate them.  I did not wish to execute the Duc d'Enghien,
but he would interfere with Fouche by getting up conspiracies on his
own account, when I had given the conspiracy contract to one of my
own ministers.  The poor fellow had to die.  It was a case of no die,
no Empire, and I thought it best for the French people that they
should have an Empire."

Those who criticise Bonaparte's acts in these years should consider
these words, and remember that the great warrior in no case did any
of the killing himself.

It was on the 18th of May, 1804, that the Empire was proclaimed and
Napoleon assumed his new title amid great rejoicing.

"Now for the coronation," he said.  "This thing must go off in style,
Fouche.  Whom shall I have to crown me?"

"Well," said Fouche, "if you are after a sensation, I'd send for
Louis de Bourbon; if you want it to go off easily, I'd send for your
old hatter in the Rue de Victoire; if you want to give it a
ceremonial touch, I'd send for the Pope, but, on the whole, I rather
think I'd do it myself.  You picked it up yourself, why not put it on
your own head?"

"Good idea," returned Bonaparte.  "And highly original.  You may
increase your salary a hundred francs a week, Fouche.  I'll crown
myself, but I think it ought to come as a surprise, don't you?"

"Yes," said Fouche.  "That is, if you can surprise the French people-
-which I doubt.  If you walked into Notre Dame to-morrow on your
hands, with the crown of France on one foot and the diadem of Italy
on the other, the people wouldn't be a bit surprised--you're always
doing such things."

"Nevertheless," said Napoleon, "we'll surprise them.  Send word to
the Pope that I want to see him officially on December 2d at Notre
Dame.  If he hesitates about coming, tell him I'll walk over and
bring him myself the first clear day we have."

This plan was followed out to the letter, and the Pope, leaving Rome
on the 5th of November, entered Paris to crown the Emperor and
Empress of the French on December 2, 1804, as requested.  What
subsequently followed the world knows.  Just as the Pope was about to
place the imperial diadem on the brow of Bonaparte, the Emperor
seized it and with his own hands placed it there.

"Excuse me, your Holiness," he said, as he did so, "but the joke is
on you.  This is my crown, and I think I'm a big enough man to hang
it up where it belongs."

Pius VII. was much chagrined, but, like the good man that he was, he
did not show it, nor did he resent the Emperor's second interference
when it came to the crowning of Josephine.  The coronation over,
Napoleon and Josephine turned to the splendid audience, and marched
down the centre aisle to the door, where they entered a superb golden
carriage in which, amid the plaudits of the people, they drove to the
Tuileries.

"Ah--at last!" said Bonaparte, as he entered the Palace.  "I have got
there.  The thing to do now is to stay there.  Ah, me!" he added,
with a sigh.  "These French--these French! they are as fickle as the
only woman I have ever loved.  By-the-way, Josephine, what was it you
asked me on the way down the aisle?  The people howled so I couldn't
hear you."

"I only asked you if"--here the Empress hesitated.

"Well?  If what?" frowned the Emperor.

"If my crown was on straight," returned Josephine.

"Madame," said the Emperor, sternly, "when you are prompted to ask
that question again, remember who gave you that crown, and when you
remember that it was I, remember also that when I give anything to
anybody I give it to them straight."

Here the Emperor's frown relaxed, and he burst out into laughter.

"But that was a bad break of the organist!" he said.

"Which was that?" asked Josephine.

"Why--didn't you notice when the Pope came in he played 'Tiara Boom-
de-ay'?" said Bonaparte, with a roar.  "It was awful--I shall have to
send him a pourboire."



CHAPTER IX:  THE RISE OF THE EMPIRE
1805-1810



"What next?" asked Fouche, the morning after the coronation, as he
entered the Emperor's cabinet.

"Breakfast," returned Bonaparte, laconically; "what did you suppose?
You didn't think I was going swimming in the Seine, did you?"

"I never think," retorted Fouche.

"That's evident," said Napoleon.  "Is the arch-treasurer of my empire
up yet?  The Empress is going shopping, and wants an appropriation."

"He is, Your Majesty," said Fouche, looking at his memorandum-book.
"He rose at 7:30, dressed as usual, parted his hair on the left-hand
side, and breakfasted at eight.  At 8:15 he read the Moniteur, and
sneezed twice while perusing the second column of the fourth page--"

"What is the meaning of these petty details?" cried the Emperor,
impatiently.

"I merely wished to show Your Majesty that as the Sherlock Holmes of
this administration I am doing my duty.  There isn't a man in France
who is not being shadowed in your behalf," returned the minister of
police.

The Emperor looked out of the window; then, turning to Fouche, he
said, the stern, impatient look fading into softness, "Pardon my
irritability, Fouche.  You are a genius, and I appreciate you, though
I may not always show it.  I didn't sleep well last night, and in
consequence I am not unduly amiable this morning."

"Your Majesty is not ill, I trust?" said Fouche, with a show of
anxiety.

"No," replied the Emperor.  "The fact is, old man, I--ah--I forgot to
take the crown off when I went to bed."

Thus began that wonderful reign which forms so many dazzling pages in
modern history.  Bonaparte's first act after providing lucrative
positions for his family was to write another letter, couched in
language of a most fraternal nature, to the King of England, asking
for peace.

"Dear Cousin George," he wrote, "you have probably read in the
newspapers by this time that I'm working under a new alias, and I
hope you will like it as well as I do.  It's great fun, but there is
one feature of it all that I don't like.  I hate to be fighting with
my new cousins all the time, and particularly with you whom I have
always loved deeply, though secretly.  Now, my dear George, let me
ask you what's the use of a prolonged fight?  You've waxed fat in ten
years, and so have I.  We've painted the earth red between us.  Why
can't we be satisfied?  Why should our relations continue to be
strained?  I've got some personal relations I'd like to have
strained, but I can attend to them myself.  Let US have peace.  I
don't want too big a piece.  Give me enough, and you can have the
rest.  Let us restore the entente cordiale and go about our business
without any further scrapping.  'Let dogs delight to bark and bite,'
as your illustrious poet hath it, 'for 'tis their nature to.'  As for
us, the earth is large enough for both.  You take the Western
Hemisphere and I'll keep this.  Russia and the others can have what
remains.

Yours truly,
NAPOLEON,
Emperor of the French.

"P.S.--I enclose a stamped and directed envelope for a reply, and if
I don't get it inside of two weeks I'll come over and smoke you out."


To this peace-seeking communication England, through her ministers,
replied to the effect that she wanted peace as much as France did,
but that she could not enter into it without the consent of Russia.

"That settles it," said Napoleon.  "It's to be war.  I'm willing to
divide creation with England, but two's company and three's a crowd,
and the Russian Bear must keep his paws off.  I will go to Italy,
Bourrienne, collect a few more thrones, and then we'll get to work on
a new map of Europe.  Russia never did look well or graceful on the
existing maps.  It makes the continent look lop-sided, and Germany
and Austria need trimming down a bit.  I propose to shove Russia over
into Asia, annex Germany and Austria to France, drop Turkey into the
Bosporus, and tow England farther north and hitch her on to the north
pole.  Wire the Italians to get out their iron crown and dust it off.
I'll take a run down to Milan, in May, and give my coronation
performance there.  Such a good show as that of December 2nd ought to
be taken on the road."

The latter part of this plan was fulfilled to the letter, and on the
20th of May, 1805, Bonaparte and Josephine were crowned King and
Queen of Italy at Milan.

"Now, my dear," said Bonaparte, after the ceremony, "hereafter we
must drop the first person singular I and assume the dignity of the
editorial WE.  Emperors and editors alike are entitled to the
distinction.  It's a sign of plurality which is often quite as
effective as a majority.  Furthermore, you and We can do it
logically, for we are several persons all at once, what with the
assortment of thrones that we have acquired in the second-hand shops
of the earth, all of which must be sat on."

Crowned King of Italy, leaving Eugene de Beauharnais as Viceroy at
Milan, Napoleon returned to Paris.

"Now that We have replenished our stock of crowns," he said to his
generals, "We will make a tour of Germany.  We've always had a great
desire to visit Berlin, and now's our imperial chance.  Tell the
arch-treasurer to telephone Frederick to reserve his best palace for
our occupancy."

Then began a series of war-clouds which kept the European
correspondents of the American Sunday newspapers in a state of
anxious turmoil for years.  In our own time a single war-cloud is
enough to drive a capable correspondent to the verge of desperation,
but when we consider that Bonaparte was letting loose the clouds of
war in all sections of Europe simultaneously, it is easy to
understand how it has come about that we of to-day, who study history
in the daily press, have the most vague ideas as to the motives of
the quarrelling potentates at the beginning of this century.

For instance, after starting for Berlin, Bonaparte makes a diversion
at Ulm, and ends for the moment by capturing Vienna and taking up his
abode in the castle of Schonbrunn, the home of the Austrian Caesars.
Then the scene of activity is transferred to Cape Trafalgar, where
Nelson routs the French fleet, and Bonaparte is for an instant
discomfited, but above which he rises superior.

"If We had been there ourself We'd have felt worse about it," he
said.  "But We were not, and therefore it is none of our funeral--
and, after all, what has it accomplished?  The hoard of aldermen of
London have named a square in London after the cape, and stuck up a
monument to Nelson in the middle of it, which is the rendezvous of
all the strikers and socialists of England.  Some day We'll go over
to Trafalgar Square ourself and put a new face on that statue, and it
will bear some resemblance to us, unless We are mistaken.  When We
get back to Paris, likewise, We will issue an imperial decree
ordering a new navy for these capable admirals of ours more suited to
their abilities, and M. Villeneuve shall have his choice between a
camel and a gravy-boat for his flag-ship."

Nevertheless, the Emperor realized that his prestige had received a
blow which it was necessary to retrieve.

"Paris doesn't like it," wrote Fouche, "and the general sentiment
seems to be that your show isn't what it used to be.  You need a
victory just about now, and if you could manage to lose a leg on the
field of battle it would strengthen your standing with your
subjects."

"Good Fouche," murmured the Emperor to himself as he read the
despatch.  "You are indeed watchful of our interests.  It shall be
done as you suggest, even if it costs a leg.  We will engage the
Russians at Austerlitz."

On the 2d of December this battle of the Emperors was fought, and
resulted in a most glorious victory for the French arms.

"We scored seven touch-downs in the first five minutes, and at the
end of the first half were ten goals to the good," said Bonaparte,
writing home to Josephine, "and all without my touching the ball.
The Emperor of Germany and the excessively smart Alexander of Russia
sat on dead-head hill and watched the game with interest, but in
spite of my repeated efforts to get them to do so, were utterly
unwilling to cover my bets on the final result.  The second half
opened brilliantly.  Murat made a flying wedge with our centre-rush,
threw himself impetuously upon Kutusoff, the Russian half-back,
pushed the enemy back beyond the goal posts, and the game was
practically over.  The emperors on dead-head hill gave it up then and
there, and the championship of 1805 is ours.  We understand England
disputes this, but we are willing to play them on neutral ground at
any time.  They can beat us in aquatic sports, but given a good,
hard, real-estate field, we can do them up whether Wellington plays
or not."

"It was a glorious victory," wrote Fouche to the Emperor, "and it has
had a great effect on Paris.  You are called the Hinkey of your time,
but I still think you erred in not losing that leg.  Can't you work
in another coronation somewhere?  You haven't acquired a new throne
in over six months, and the people are beginning to murmur."

Bonaparte's reply was immediate.

"Am too busy to go throne-hunting.  Send my brother Joseph down to
Naples as my agent.  There's a crown there.  Let him put it on, and
tell Paris that he is my proxy.  Joseph may not want to go because of
the cholera scare, but tell him We wish it, and if he still demurs
whisper the word 'Alp' in his ear.  He'll go when he hears that word,
particularly if you say it in that short, sharp, and decisive manner
to which it so readily lends itself."

These instructions were carried out, and Paris was for the time being
satisfied; but to clinch matters, as it were, the Emperor went still
further, and married Eugene de Beauharnais to the daughter of the
King of Bavaria, conferred a few choice principalities upon his
sister Eliza, and, sending for Prince Borghese, one of the most
aristocratic gentlemen of Italy, gave him in marriage to his sister
Pauline.

"We're getting into good society by degrees," wrote the Emperor to
the Empress, "and now that you are the mother-in-law of a real
prince, kindly see that your manner is imperious to the extreme
degree, and stop serving pie at state banquets."

The succeeding two years were but repetitions of the first year of
the Empire.  Bonaparte proceeded from one victory to another.
Prussia was humbled.  The French Emperor occupied Berlin, and, as he
had done in Italy, levied upon the art treasures of that city for the
enrichment of Paris.

"We'll have quite a Salon if we go on," said Bonaparte.

"Anybody'd think you were getting up a corner in oil," said
Frederick, ruefully, as he watched the packers at work boxing his
most treasured paintings for shipment.

"We am getting up a corner in all things," retorted Bonaparte.
"Paris will soon be the Boston of Europe--it will be the Hub of the
Universe."

"You might leave me something," said the Prussian king.  "I haven't
an old master left."

"Well, never mind," said Napoleon, soothingly.  "We'll be a young
master to you.  Now go to bed, like a good fellow, and take a good
rest.  There's a delegation of Poles waiting for me outside.  They
think We am going to erect a telegraph system to Russia, and they
want employment."

"As operators?" asked Frederick, sadly.

"No, stupid," returned Napoleon, "as Poles."

The Prussian left the room in tears.  To his great regret policy
compelled Bonaparte to decline the petition of the Polanders to be
allowed to rehabilitate themselves as a nation.  As we have seen, he
was a man of peace, and many miles away from home at that, and hence
had no desire to further exasperate Russia by meddling in an affair
so close to the Czar's heart.  This diplomatic foresight resulted in
the Peace of Tilsit.  The Czar, appreciating Bonaparte's delicacy in
the matter of Poland, was quite won over, and consented to an
interview by means of which a basis might be reached upon which all
might rest from warfare.  Tilsit was chosen as the place of meeting,
and fearing lest they might be interrupted by reporters, the two
emperors decided to hold their conference upon a raft anchored in the
middle of the river Niemen.  It must be remembered that tugs had not
been invented at this time, so that the raft was comparatively safe
from those "Boswells of the news," as reporters have been called.
Fouche was very anxious about this decision however.

"Look out for yourself, my dear Emperor," he wrote.  "Wear a cork
suit, or insist that the raft shall be plentifully supplied with
life-preservers.  Those Eastern emperors would like nothing better
than to have you founder in the Niemen."

"We are not afraid," Napoleon replied.  "If the craft sinks We shall
swim ashore on Alexander's back."  Nevertheless, all other historians
to the contrary, Bonaparte did wear a cork suit beneath his uniform.
We have this on the authority of the nephew of the valet of the late
Napoleon III., who had access to the private papers of this wonderful
family.

Nothing disastrous occurred upon this occasion in spite of the
temptation thrown in Alexander's way to sink the raft and thus rid
the world of a dangerous rival to his supremacy.  The conference
resulted in a treaty of peace, concluded on the 7th of July, 1807,
and by it a few more thrones were added to the Bonaparte collection.
Jerome, who had been trying to make a living as a music teacher in
America, having been divorced from his American wife and married to
another, was made King of Westphalia.

"Having made a failure in the West, my dear brother," said Bonaparte,
"what could be more appropriate?"

Louis was made King of Holland, and Joseph's kingship of Naples was
fully recognized, and, further, Bonaparte was enabled to return to
Paris and show himself to the citizens of that fickle city, who were
getting restive under Josephine's rule.

"They like Josephine well enough," wrote Fouche, "but the men prefer
to have you here.  The fact that things run smoothly under a woman's
rule is giving the female suffragists a great boom, and the men say
that domestic life is being ruined.  Cooks are scarce, having
deserted the kitchen for the primaries, and altogether the outlook is
effeminate.  Therefore, come back as soon as you can, for if you
don't the first thing we know the women will be voting, and you'll
find you'll have to give up your seat to a lady."

The Emperor's return to Paris was marked by great rejoicing,
particularly by the large number of hatters and laundresses and
stable-boys whom he had in the meantime paid for their early services
by making them dukes and duchesses.  The court was magnificent, and
entirely new.  No second-hand nobles were allowed within the sacred
circle, and the result was one of extreme splendor.  In a small way,
to maintain the interest which he had inspired, as well as to keep up
the discipline of his army, a few conquests, including those of Spain
and Portugal, were indulged in.  Joseph was removed from a
comfortable, warm throne at Naples and made King of Spain, and Murat
was substituted for him at Naples.  The Emperor's elder brother did
not like the change, but submitted as gracefully as ever.

"Naples was extremely comfortable," he said, "but this Madrid
position is not at all to my taste.  I prefer macaroni to garlic, and
I cannot endure these Carmencita dances--they remind me too much of
the green-apple season in the old Corsican days.  However, what my
brother wills I do, merely from force of habit--not that I fear him
or consider myself bound to obey him, mind you, but because I am
averse to family differences.  One must yield, and I have always been
the self-sacrificing member of the family.  He's put me here, and I
hope to remain."

This promotion of Joseph was a misstep for one who desired peace, and
Bonaparte soon found another war with Austria on the tapis because of
it.  Emperor Francis Joseph, jealous perhaps of the copyright on his
name, declined to recognize King Joseph of Spain.  Whereupon
Bonaparte again set out for Austria, where, on the 6th of July, 1809,
Austria having recognized the strength of Bonaparte's arguments,
backed up, as they were, by an overwhelming force of men, each worthy
of a marshal's baton, and all confident, under the new regime, of
some day securing it, an armistice was agreed upon, and on the 14th
of October a treaty satisfactory to France was signed.

"If I have to come back again, my dear Emperor Joseph," Bonaparte
said, as he set out for Paris, "it will be for the purpose of giving
you a new position, which you may not like so well as the neat and
rather gaudy sinecure you now hold."

"Which is--?" added the Austrian.

"I'll bring you a snow-shovel and set you to clearing off the steps."

"What steps?" queried the Austrian anxiously.

"The back-steppes of Russia," replied Napoleon, sternly.  "The only
thing that keeps me from doing it now is that I--ah--I hate to do
anything unkind to the father of--ah--your daughter Marie-Louise,
whom I met at the dance last night, and who, between you and me,
looks remarkably like the only woman I ever loved."



CHAPTER X:  THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE
1810-1814



Just before the opening of the year 1810, which marked the beginning
of Bonaparte's decay, Fouche demanded an audience.

"Well, Fouche," said the Emperor, "what now?"

"This Empire can't go much further, Your Majesty, unless more novelty
is introduced.  I've had my men out all through France taking notes,
and there's but one opinion among 'em all.  You've got to do
something new or stop the show.  If you'd only done what I suggested
at Austerlitz, and lost a leg, it would have been different.  The
people don't ask much song-and-dance business from a one-legged man."

"We compromised with you there," retorted Napoleon.  "At Ratisbon our
imperial foot was laid up for a week."

"Yes--but you didn't lose it," returned Fouche.  "Can't you see the
difference?  If you'd lost it, and come home without it, there'd have
been evidence of your suffering.  As it is, do you know what your
enemies are saying about your foot?"

"We do not," said the Emperor, sternly.  "What do they say?"

"Well, the Bourbons say you stepped on it running away from the
enemy's guns, and the extreme Republicans say your wound is nothing
but gout and the result of high, undemocratic living.  Now, my dear
sir--Sire, I mean--I take a great deal of interest in this Empire.
It pays me my salary, and I've had charge of the calcium lights for
some time, and I don't want our lustre dimmed, but it will be dimmed
unless, as I have already told you a million times, we introduce some
new act on our programme.  1492 didn't succeed on its music, or its
jokes, or its living pictures.  It was the introduction of novelties
every week that kept it on the boards for four hundred years."

"Well--what do you propose?" asked Bonaparte, recognizing the truth
of Fouche's words.

"I--ah--I think you ought to get married," said Fouche.

"We am married, you--you--idiot," cried Bonaparte.

"Well, marry again," said Fouche.  "You've been giving other people
away at a great rate for several years--what's the matter with
acquiring a real princess for yourself?"

"You advise bigamy, do you?" asked Bonaparte, scornfully.

"Not on your life," returned Fouche, "but a real elegant divorce,
followed by an imperial wedding, would rattle the bones of this blase
old Paris as they haven't been rattled since Robespierre's day."

Bonaparte reddened, then, rising from the throne and putting his hand
to the side of his mouth, he said, in a low, agitated tone:

"Close the door, Fouche.  Close the door and come here.  We want to
whisper something to you."

The minister did as he was bidden.

"Fouche, old boy," chuckled the Emperor in the ear of his rascally
aide--"Fouche, you're a mind-reader.  We've been thinking of just
that very thing for some time--in fact, ever since We met that old
woman Emperor Francis Joseph.  He'd make an elegant mother-in-law."

"Precisely," said Fouche.  "His daughter Marie-Louise, an archduchess
by birth, is the one I had selected for you.  History will no doubt
say that I oppose this match, and publicly perhaps I may seem to do
so, but you will understand, my dear Sire, that this opposition will
serve, as it is designed to serve, as an advertisement of our
enterprise, and without advertising we might as well put up the
shutters.  Shall we--ah--announce the attraction to the public?"

"Not yet," said Napoleon.  "We must get rid of our leading lady
before we bring on the understudy."

It is a sad chapter in the history of this eminent man wherein is
told the heart-breaking story of his sacrifice--the giving up through
sheer love of his country of the only woman he had ever loved, and we
should prefer to pass it over in silence.  We allude to it here
merely to show that it was brought about by the exigencies of his
office, and that it was nothing short of heroic self-abnegation which
led this faithful lover of his adopted native land to put the
beautiful Josephine away from him.  He had builded an Empire for an
opera bouffe people, and he was resolved to maintain it at any cost.

In March, 1810, Bonaparte, having in his anxiety to spare the
feelings of the divorced Josephine, wooed Marie-Louise by proxy in
the person of Marshal Berthier, met his new fiancee at Soissons.

"It is three months since we lost our beloved Josephine," he said to
Fouche, with tears in his voice, "but the wound is beginning to heal.
We fear we shall never love again, but for the sake of the Empire we
will now begin to take notice once more.  We will meet our bride-
elect at Soissons, and escort her to Paris ourself."

This was done, and on the 2nd of April, 1810, Marie-Louise became
Empress of France.  Josephine, meanwhile, had retired to Malmaison
with alimony of 3,000,000 francs.

Fouche was delighted; Paris was provided with conversation enough for
a year in any event, and Bonaparte found it possible to relax a
little in his efforts to inspire interest.  His main anxiety in the
ensuing year was as to his family affairs.  His brothers did not turn
out so highly successful as professional kings as he had hoped, and
it became necessary to depose Louis the King of Holland and place him
under arrest.  Joseph, too, desired to resign the Spanish throne,
which he had found to be far from comfortable, and there was much
else to restore Bonaparte's early proneness to irritability; nor was
his lot rendered any more happy by Marie-Louise's expressed
determination not to go to tea with Josephine at Malmaison on Sunday
nights, as the Emperor wished her to do.

"You may go if you please," said she, "but I shall not.  Family
reunions are never agreeable, and the circumstances of this are so
peculiar that even if they had redeeming features this one would be
impossible."

"We call that rebellion--don't you?" asked Bonaparte of Fouche.

"No," said Fouche.  "She's right, and it's for your good.  If she and
Josephine got chumming and compared notes, I'm rather of the opinion
that there'd be another divorce."

Fouche's reply so enraged the Emperor that he dismissed him from his
post, and the Empire began to fall.

"I leave you at your zenith, Sire," said Fouche.  "You send me to
Rome as governor in the hope that I will get the Roman fever and die.
I know it well; but let me tell you that the reaction is nearly due,
and with the loss of your stage manager the farce begins to pall.
Farewell.  If you can hook yourself on to your zenith and stay there,
do so, but that you will I don't think."

It was as Fouche said.  Perplexities now arose which bade fair to
overwhelm the Emperor.  For a moment they cleared away when the
infant son of Marie-Louise and Bonaparte was born, but they broke out
with increasing embarrassment immediately after.

"What has your son-in-law named his boy, Francis Joseph?" asked
Alexander of Russia.

"King of Rome," returned the Austrian.

"What!" cried Alexander, "and not after you--or me?  The coxcomb!  I
will make war upon him."

This anecdote is here given to the world for the first time.  It is
generally supposed that the rupture of friendly relations between
Alexander and Bonaparte grew out of other causes, but the truth is as
indicated in this story.  Had Fouche been at hand, Bonaparte would
never have made the mistake, but it was made, and war was declared.

After a succession of hard-fought battles the invading army of the
Emperor entered Moscow, but Napoleon's spirit was broken.

"These Russian names are giving us paresis!" he cried.  "How I ever
got here I don't know, and I find myself unprovided with a return
ticket.  The names of the Russian generals, to say nothing of those
of their rivers and cities, make my head ache, and have ruined my
teeth.  I fear, Davoust, that I have had my day.  It was easy to call
on the Pollylukes to surrender in Africa; it never unduly taxed my
powers of enunciation to speak the honeyed names of Italy; the
Austrian tongue never bothered me; but when I try to inspire my
soldiers with remarks like, 'On to Smolensko!' or 'Down with
Rostopchin!' and 'Shall we be discouraged because Tchigagoff, and
Kutusoff, and Carrymeoffski, of the Upperjnavyk Cgold Sdream Gards,
oppose us?' I want to lie down and die.  What is the sense of these
barbed-wire names, anyhow?  Why, when I was told that Barclay de
Tolly had abandoned Vitepsk, and was marching on Smolensko with a
fair chance of uniting with Tormagoff and Wittgenstein, I was so
mixed that I couldn't tell whether Vitepsk was a brigadier-general or
a Russian summer-resort.  Nevertheless, we have arrived, and I think
we can pass a comfortable winter in Moscow.  Is Moscow a cold place,
do you know?"

Marshal Ney looked out of the window.

"No, Your Majesty," he said; "I judge from appearances that it's the
hottest place in creation, just now.  Look!"

Bonaparte's heart sank within him.  He looked and saw the city in
flames.

"Well," he cried, "why don't you do something?  What kind of
theatrical soldiers are you?  Ring up the fire department!  Ah,
Fouche, Fouche, if you were only here now!  You could at least arrest
the flames."

It was too late.  Nothing could be done, and the conquering hero of
nearly twenty years now experienced the bitterness of defeat.
Rushing through the blazing town, he ordered a retreat, and was soon
sadly wending his way back to Paris.

"We are afraid," he murmured, "that that Moscow fire has cooked our
imperial goose."

Then, finding the progress of the army too slow, and anxious to hear
the news of Paris, Napoleon left his troops under the command of Ney
and pushed rapidly on, travelling incognito, not being desirous of
accepting such receptions and fetes in his honor as the enemy had in
store for him.

"I do not like to leave my army in such sore straits," he said, "but
I must.  I am needed at the Tuileries.  The King of Rome has fallen
in love with his nurse, and I understand also that there is a
conspiracy to steal the throne and sell it.  This must not be.
Reassure the army of my love.  Tell them that they are, as was the
army of Egypt, my children, and that they may play out in the snow a
little while longer, but must come in before they catch cold."

With these words he was off.  Paris, as usual, received him with open
arms.  Things had been dull during his absence, and his return meant
excitement.  The total loss of the French in this campaign was
450,000 men, nearly a thousand cannon, and seventy-five eagles and
standards.

"It's a heavy loss," said the Emperor, "but it took a snow-storm to
do it.  I'd rather fight bears than blizzards; but the French must
not be discouraged.  Let them join the army.  The Russians have
captured three thousand and forty-eight officers whose places must be
filled.  If that isn't encouragement to join the army I expect to
raise next spring I don't know what is.  As for the eagles--you can
get gold eagles in America for ten dollars apiece, so why repine!  On
with the dance, let joy be unconfined!"

It was too late, however.  The Empire had palled.  Bonaparte could
have started a comic paper and still have failed to rouse Paris from
its lethargy, and Paris is the heart of France.  Storms gathered,
war-clouds multiplied, the nations of the earth united against him,
the King of Rome began cutting his teeth and destroyed the Emperor's
rest.  The foot-ball of fate that chance had kicked so high came down
to earth with a sickening thud, and Mr. Bonaparte of Corsica yielded
to the inevitable.

"Fouche," he said, sending for the exiled minister in his extremity,
"when I lost you I lost my leading man--the star of my enterprise.
During your absence the prompter's box has been empty, and I don't
know what to do.  The world is against me--even France.  I see but
one thing left.  Do you think I could restore confidence by divorcing
Marie-Louise and remarrying Josephine?  It strikes me that an annual
shaking-up of that nature would sort of liven matters up.

"No!" said Fouche, "it won't do.  They've had one divorce.  You
mustn't repeat yourself now.  You forget the thing I've always tried
to impress upon you.  Be New; not parvenu or ingenue, but plain up
and down New is what you need to be.  It would have been just the
same if you'd thrashed Russia.  They'd have forced you to go on and
conquer China; then they'd have demanded a war with Japan, after
which they'd have dethroned you if you didn't annex the Sandwich
Islands to the United States, and then bag the whole thing for
France.  This is what you get for wanting to rule the French people.
You can't keep quiet--you've got to have a move on you constantly or
they won't have you.  Furthermore, you mustn't make 'em laugh except
at the other man.  You've had luck in that respect, but there's no
telling how long it will continue now that you have a son.  He's
beginning to say funny things, and they're generally at your expense,
and one or two people hereabouts have snickered at you already."

"What do you mean?" said Napoleon, with a frown.  "What has the boy
said about me?"

"He told the Minister of Finance the other night that now that you
were the father of a real Emperor's grandson, you had a valid claim
to respectability, and he'd bite the head off the first person who
said you hadn't," said Fouche.

"Well--that certainly was standing up for his daddy," said the
Emperor, fondly.

"Ye-e-es," said Fouche, "but it's one of those double back-action
remarks that do more harm than good."

"Well," said Bonaparte, desperately, "let the boy say what he
pleases; he's my son, and he has that right.  The thing for us to
decide is, what shall we do now?"

"There are three things left," said Fouche.

"And they?" asked the Emperor.

"Write Trilby, abdicate, or commit suicide.  The first is beyond you.
You know enough about Paris, but your style is against you.  As for
the second, abdication--if you abdicate you may come back, and the
trouble will begin all over again.  If you commit suicide, you won't
have any more rows.  The French will be startled, and say that it's a
splendid climax, and you will have the satisfaction of knowing that
some other man will try to please them with the same result."

"It shall be abdication," said the Emperor, with a sigh.  "I don't
mind suicide, but, hang it, Fouche, if I killed myself I could not
read what the papers said about it.  As for writing Trilby, it would
do more for royalty than for me.  Therefore I will go to
Fontainebleau and abdicate.  I will go into exile at Elba.  Exiles
are most interesting people, and it may be that I'll have another
chance."

This course was taken, and on the 20th of April, 1814, Bonaparte
abdicated.  His speech to his faithful guard was one of the most
affecting farewells in history, and had much to do with the encore
which Napoleon received less than a year after.  Escorted by four
commissioners, one from each of the great allied powers, Austria,
Russia, England, and Prussia, and attended by a few attached friends
and servants, Bonaparte set out from Paris.  The party occupied
fourteen carriages, Bonaparte in the first; and as they left the
capital the ex-Emperor, leaning out of the window, looked back at the
train of conveyances and sighed.

"What, Sire?  You sigh?" cried Bertrand.

"Yes, Bertrand, yes.  Not for my departed glory, but because I am a
living Frenchman, and not a dead Irishman."

"And why so, Sire?" asked Bertrand.

"Because, my friend, of the carriages.  There are fourteen in this
funeral.  Think, Bertrand," he moaned, in a tone rendered doubly
impressive by the fact that it reminded one of Henry Irving in one of
his most mannered moments.  "Think how I should have enjoyed this
moment had I been a dead Irishman!"



CHAPTER XI:  ELBA--THE RETURN--WATERLOO--ST. HELENA
1814-1815



Bonaparte's spirits rose as the party proceeded.  There were
remarkable evidences all along the line of march that his greatness,
while dimmed in one sense, had not diminished in others.  A series of
attacks upon him had been arranged, much to the fallen Emperor's
delight.

"If you want to make a fellow popular, Bertrand," he remarked after
one of them, "kick him when he's down.  I'll wager I am having a
better time now than Louis XVIII., and, after all, I regard this
merely as a vacation.  I'll have a good rest at Elba while Louis is
pushing the button of government at Paris.  After a while I'll come
back and press the buttons and Louis will do the rest.  There's some
honey in the old Bees yet."

At Valence, however, the Emperor had a bitter cup to drain.  Meeting
Augereau there, with whom he had fallen out, he addressed him in his
old-time imperial style, asking him what right he had to still live,
and requesting him to stand out of his light.  Augereau, taking
advantage of the Emperor's fallen estate, replied in a spirited
manner, calling Napoleon an ex-Emperor and a tin soldier, as well as
applying several other epithets to his dethroned majesty which might
be printed in a French book, but can have no place in this.

"We shall meet again," retorted Bonaparte, with a threatening
gesture.

"Not if I see you first," replied Augereau.  "If we do, however, it
will be under a new system of etiquette."

"I'll bet you a crown you'll be singing a new tune inside of a year,"
cried the exasperated Bonaparte.

"I'll go you," said Augereau, snapping his fingers.  "Put up your
crown."

Napoleon felt keenly the stinging satire of this retort.  Bowing his
head with a groan, he had to acknowledge that he had no crown, but in
an instant he recovered.

"But I have a Napoleon left in my clothes!" he cried, with a dry
laugh at his own wit.  "I'll bet it against your income for the next
forty centuries, which is giving you large odds, that I shall return,
and when I do, Monsieur Augereau, your name will be Denis."

The appreciation of those about them of this sally so enraged
Augereau that he was discomfited utterly, and he left Bonaparte's
presence muttering words which are fortunately forgotten.

Arrived at Cannes, Bonaparte had his choice of vessels upon which to
make his voyage to Elba, one English and one French.  "I'll take the
English.  I shall not trust my life to a Bourbon ship if I know
myself.  I'd rather go to sea in a bowl," said he.

Hence it was that an English vessel, the Undaunted, had the honor of
transporting the illustrious exile to his island dominion.  On the
4th of May he landed, and immediately made a survey of his new
kingdom.

"It isn't large," he observed, as he made a memorandum of its
dimensions, "but neither is a canvas-back duck.  I think we can make
something of it, particularly as the people seem glad to see me."

This was indeed the truth.  The Elbese were delighted to have
Bonaparte in their midst.  They realized that excursion steamers
which had hitherto passed them by would now come crowded from main-
top to keel with persons desirous of seeing the illustrious captive.
Hotel rates rose 200 per cent., and on the first Sunday of his stay
on the island the receipts of the Island Museum, as it was now
called, were sufficient to pay its taxes to the French government,
which had been in arrears for some time, ten times over.

"I feel like an ossified man or a turtle-boy," said the Emperor to
Bertrand, as the curious visitors gaped awe-stricken at the caged
lion.  "If I only had a few pictures of myself to sell these people I
could buy up the national debt, foreclose the mortgage, and go back
to France as its absolute master."

The popularity of Bonaparte as an attraction to outsiders so endeared
him to the hearts of his new subjects that he practically had greater
sway here than he ever had in the palmy days of the Empire.  The
citizens made him master of everything, and Bonaparte filled the role
to the full.  Provided with guards and servants, he surrounded
himself with all the gaud and glitter of a military despotism, and,
in default of continents to capture, he kept his hand in trim as a
commander by the conquest of such small neighboring islands as nature
had placed within reach, but it could hardly be expected that he
could long remain tranquil.  His eyes soon wearied of the
circumscribed limits of Elba.

"It's all very well to be monarch of all you survey, Bertrand," said
he, mournfully, "but as for me, give me some of the things that can't
be seen.  I might as well be that old dried-up fig of a P. T. Olemy
over there in Egypt as Emperor of a vest-pocket Empire like this.
Isn't there any news from France?"

"Yes," returned Bertrand, "Paris is murmuring again.  Louis hasn't
stopped eating yet, and the French think it's time his dinner was
over."

"Ha!" cried Bonaparte in ecstasy.  "I thought so.  He's too much of a
revivalist to suit Paris.  Furthermore, I'm told he's brought out his
shop-worn aristocracy to dazzle France again.  They're all wool and a
yard wide, but you needn't think my handmade nobility is going to
efface itself just because the Montmorencies and the Rohans don't ask
it out to dine.  My dukes and duchesses will have something to say, I
fancy, and if my old laundress, the Duchess of Dantzig, doesn't take
the starch out of the old regime I'll be mightily mistaken."

And this was the exact situation.  As Bonaparte said, the old regime
by their hauteur so enraged the new regime that by the new year of
1815 it was seen by all except those in authority that the return of
the exile, Corporal Violet, as he was now called, was inevitable.  So
it came about that on the 20th of February, his pockets stuffed with
impromptu addresses to the people and the army, Bonaparte, eluding
those whose duty it was to watch him, set sail, and on the 1st of
March he reached Cannes, whence he immediately marched, gaining
recruits at every step, to Paris.

At Lyons he began to issue his impromptu addresses, and they were in
his best style.

"People of France," ran one, "I am refreshed, and have returned to
resume business at the old stand.  March 21st will be bargain day,
and I have on hand a select assortment of second-hand goods.  One
king, one aristocracy, much worn and slightly dog-eared, and a
monarchy will be disposed of at less than cost.  Come early and avoid
the rush.  A dukedom will be given away with every purchase.  Do not
forget the address--The Tuileries, Paris."

This was signed "Napoleon, Emperor."  Its effect was instantaneous,
and the appointment was faithfully kept, for on the evening of March
20th the Emperor, amid great enthusiasm, entered the Tuileries, where
he was met by all his old friends, including Fouche.

"Fouche," he said, as he entered the throne-room, "give my card to
Louis the XVIII., and ask him if his luggage is ready.  Make out his
bill, and when he has paid it, tell him that I have ordered the 6:10
train to start at 9:48.  He can easily catch it."

"He has already departed, Sire," returned Fouche.  "He had an
imperative engagement in the Netherlands.  In his haste he left his
crown hanging on the hat-rack in the hall."

"Well, send it to him," replied Bonaparte.  "I don't want HIS crown.
I want my own.  It shall never be said that I robbed a poor fellow
out of work of his hat."

Settled once more upon his imperial throne, the main question which
had previously agitated the Emperor and his advisers, and
particularly his stage-manager, Fouche, whom he now restored to his
old office, came up once more.  "What next?" and it was harder to
answer than ever, for Bonaparte's mind was no longer alert.  He was
listless and given to delay, and, worst of all, invariably sleepy.
It was evident that Elba had not proved as restful as had been hoped.

"You should not have returned," said Fouche, firmly.  "America was
the field for you.  That's where all great actors go sooner or later,
and they make fortunes.  A season in New York would have made you a
new man.  As it is you are an old man.  It seems to me that if an
Irishman can leave Queenstown with nothing but his brogue and the
clothes on his back and become an alderman of New York or Chicago
inside of two years, you with all the advertising you've had ought to
be able to get into Congress anyhow--you've got money enough for the
Senate."

"But they are not my children, those Americans," remonstrated
Napoleon, rubbing his eyes sleepily.

"Well, France isn't the family affair it once was, either," retorted
Fouche, "and you'll find it out before long.  However, we've got to
do the best we can.  Swear off your old ways and come out as a man of
Peace.  Flatter the English, and by all means don't ask your mother-
in-law Francis Joseph to send back the only woman you ever loved.
He's got her in Vienna, and he's going to keep her if he has to put
her in a safe-deposit vault."

It would have been well for Napoleon had he heeded this advice, but
as he walked about the Tuileries alone, and listened in vain for the
King of Rome's demands for more candy, and failed to see that
interesting infant sliding down the banisters and loading his toy
cannons with his mother's face-powder, he was oppressed by a sense of
loneliness, and could not resist the temptation to send for them.

"This will be the last chip I'll put on my shoulder, Fouche," he
pleaded.

"Very well," returned Fouche.  "Put it there, but I warn you.  This
last chip will break the Empire's back."

The demand was made upon Austria, and, as Fouche had said, the answer
was a most decided refusal, and the result was war.  Again the other
powers allied against Napoleon.  The forces of the enemy were placed
under Wellington.  Bonaparte led his own in person, buying a new
uniform for the purpose.  "We can handle them easily enough," said
he, "if I can only keep awake.  My situation at present reminds me so
much of the old Bromide days that I fall asleep without knowing it by
a mere association of ideas.  Still, we'll whip 'em out of their
boots."

"What boots?" demanded Fouche.

"Their Wellingtons and their Bluchers," retorted the Emperor, thereby
showing that, sleepy as he was, he had not lost his old-time ability
at repartee.

For once he was over-confident.  He fought desperately and
triumphantly for three or four days, but the fates held Waterloo in
store.  Routing the enemy at Ligny and Quatre Bras, he pushed on to
where Wellington stood in Belgium, where, on the 18th of June, was
fought the greatest of his battles.

"Now for the transformation scene," said Bonaparte on the eve of the
battle.  "If the weather is good we'll make these foreigners wish
they had worn running-shoes instead of Wellingtons."

But the weather was not clear.  It was excessively wet, and by
nightfall Bonaparte realized that all was over.  His troops were in
fine condition, but the rain seemed to have put out the fires of the
Commander's genius.  As the Imperial Guard marched before him in
review the Emperor gazed upon them fondly.

"They're like a picture!" he cried, enthusiastically.  "Just see that
line."

"Yes," returned Ney.  "Very like a picture; they remind me in a way
of a comic paper print, but that is more suitable for framing than
for fighting."

The Emperor making no response, Ney looked up and observed that his
Majesty had fallen asleep.  "That settles it," he sighed.  "To-day is
the Waterloo of Napoleon Bonaparte.  When a man sleeps at a moment
like this his friends would better prepare for a wake."

And Ney was right.  Waterloo was the Waterloo of Napoleon Bonaparte.
The opposing armies met in conflict, and, as the world knows, the
star of the great soldier was obscured forever, and France was
conquered.  Ruined in his fortunes, Bonaparte at once returned to
Paris.

"Is there a steamer for New York to-night, Fouche?" he asked, as,
completely worn out, he threw himself upon his throne and let his
chin hang dejectedly over his collar.

"No, Sire," returned Fouche, with an ill-concealed chuckle.  "There
is not.  You've missed your chance by two days.  Then isn't another
boat for ten days."

"Then I am lost," sobbed Napoleon.

"Yes, Sire, you are," returned Fouche.  "Shall I offer a reward to
anybody who will find you and return you in good order?"

"No," replied the Emperor.  "I will give myself up."

"Wise man!" said Fouche, unsympathetically.  "You're such a
confounded riddle that I wonder you didn't do it long ago."

"Ah, Fouche!" sighed the Emperor, taking his crown out of his
wardrobe and crushing it in his hands until the diamonds fell out
upon the floor, "this shows the futility of making war without
preparing for it by study.  When I was a young man I was a student.
I knew the pages of history by heart, and I learned my lessons well.
While I was the student I was invincible.  In mimic as in real war I
was the conqueror.  Everything I undertook came about as I had willed
because I was the master of facts--I dealt in facts, and I made no
mistakes.  To-day I am a conquered man, and all because I have
neglected to continue the study of the history of my people--of my
adopted native land."

"Humph!" retorted Fouche.  "I don't see how that would have helped
matters any.  All the history in creation could not have won the
battle of Waterloo for you."

"Fool that you are!" cried Napoleon, desperately, rising.  "Can't you
see?  Anybody who knows anything about the history of France knows
that the battle of Waterloo resulted fatally for me.  Had I known
that, do you suppose I'd have gone there?  Not I!  I'd have gone
fishing in the South of France instead, and this would not have
happened.  Leave me!  I wish to be alone."

Left to his own reflections Bonaparte paced his room for hours.
Then, tapping his bell, he summoned one of his faithful adherents.

"Monsieur le B-," he said, as the attendant entered, "you have heard
the news?"

"Yes, Sire," sobbed Le B-.

"Do I not carry myself well in the hour of defeat?"

"You do, Your Majesty."

"Am I pale, Le B-?"

"No--no--oh, no, not at all, Sire."

"Tell me the truth, Le B-.  We must not let the enemy find us broken
when they arrive.  How do I look?  Out with it."

"Out of sight, Sire!" replied Le B-, bending backward as far as he
could, and gazing directly at the ceiling.

"Then bring on your invader, and let us hear the worst," ordered
Napoleon, encouraged by Le B-'s assurances.

A few days later, Bonaparte, having nothing else to do, once more
abdicated, and threw himself upon the generosity of the English
people.

"I was only fooling, anyhow," he said, with a sad smile.  "If you
hadn't sent me to Elba I wouldn't have come back.  As for the
fighting, you all said I was outside of the pale of civilization, and
I had to fight.  I didn't care much about getting back into the pail,
but I really objected to having it said that I was in the tureen."

This jest completely won the hearts of the English who were used to
just such humor, who loved it, and who, many years later, showed that
love by the establishment of a comic journal as an asylum for bon-
mots similarly afflicted.  The result was, not death, but a new
Empire, the Island of St. Helena.

"This," said Wellington, "will serve to make his jokes more far-
fetched than ever; so that by sending him there we shall not only be
gracious to a fallen foe, but add to the gayety of our nation."



CHAPTER XII:  1815-1821-1895



It is with St. Helena that all biographies of Napoleon Bonaparte
hitherto published have ended, and perhaps it is just as well that
these entertaining works, prepared by purely finite minds, should end
there.  It is well for an historian not to tell more than he knows, a
principle which has guided our pen from the inception of this work to
this point, and which must continue to the bitter end.  We shall be
relentless and truthful to the last, even though in so doing we are
compelled to overthrow all historical precedent.

Bonaparte arrived at St. Helena in October, 1815.  He had embarked,
every one supposed, with the impression that he was going to America,
and those about him, fearing a passionate outbreak when he learned
the truth, tried for a time to convince him that he had taken the
wrong steamer; then when they found that he could not be deceived in
this way, they made allusions to the steering-gear having got out of
order, but the ex-Emperor merely smiled.

"You cannot fool me," he said.  "I know whither I am drifting.  I
went to a clairvoyant before leaving Paris, who cast a few dozen
horoscopes for me and they all ended at St. Helena.  It is
inevitable.  I must go there, and all these fairy tales about wrong
steamers and broken rudders and so on are useless.  I submit.  I
could return if I wished, but I do not wish to return.  By a mere
speech to these sailors I could place myself in command of this ship
to-day, turn her about and proclaim myself Emperor of the Seas; but I
don't want to.  I prefer dry land and peace to a coup de tar and the
throne of Neptune."

All of which shows that the great warrior was weary.

Then followed a dreary exile of uneventful years, in which the ex-
Emperor conducted paper campaigns of great fierceness against the
English government, which with unprecedented parsimony allowed him no
more than $60,000 a year and house rent.

"The idea of limiting me to five thousand dollars a month," he
remarked, savagely, to Sir Hudson Lowe.  "It's positively low."

"It strikes me as positively high," retorted the governor.  "You know
well enough that you couldn't spend ten dollars a week in this place
if you put your whole mind on it, if you hadn't insisted on having
French waiters in your dining-room, whom you have to tip every time
they bring you anything."

"Humph!" said Bonaparte.  "That isn't any argument.  I'm a man used
to handling large sums.  It isn't that I want to spend money; it's
that I want to have it about me in case of emergency.  However, I
know well enough why they keep my allowance down to $60,000."

"Why is it?" asked Sir Hudson.

"They know that you can't be bought for $60,000, but they wouldn't
dare make it $60,000 and one cent," retorted the captive.  "Put that
in your cigarette and smoke it, Sir Harlem, and hereafter call me
Emperor.  That's my name, Emperor N. Bonaparte."

"And I beg that you will not call me Sir Harlem," returned the
governor, irritated by the Emperor's manner.  "My name is Hudson, not
Harlem."

"Pray excuse the slip," said the Emperor, scornfully.  "I knew you
were named after some American river, I didn't know which.  However,
I imagined that the Harlem was nearer your size than the Hudson,
since the latter has some pretensions to grandeur.  Now please flow
down to the sea and lose yourself, I'm getting sleepy again."

So, in constant conflict with Sir Hudson, who refused to call him by
his title, and whom in consequence he refused to call by his proper
name, answering such epithets as "Corporal" and "Major" with a
savagely-spoken "Delaware" or an ironically respectful "Mohawk,"
Bonaparte dwelt at St. Helena until the 5th of May, 1821, when,
historians tell us, he died.  This is an error, for upon that date
Bonaparte escaped.  He had fought death too many times to succumb to
him now, and, while the writers of history have in a sense stated the
truth when they say that he passed away in the night, their readers
have gained a false impression.  It is the fact that Napoleon
Bonaparte, like Dante and Virgil, passed over the dark river Styx as
the honored leader of the rebellious forces  of Hades.  He did pass
away in the night, but he went as he went from Elba, and, as we shall
see, with more successful results.

For years the Government of Erebus had been unsatisfactory to many of
its subjects, mainly on account of the arbitrary methods of the
Weather Department.

"We are in a perpetual broil here," Caesar had said, "and I for one
am getting tired of it.  The country demands a change.  This
administration doesn't give us anything but dog-days."

For this the Roman warrior had been arrested and kept in an oven at
the rear of the Erebian Tuileries, as Apollyon's Palace was called,
for two centuries.

"The next rebel gets a gridiron, and the third will be served to
Cerberus en brochette," cried Apollyon.

Thus matters had gone on for five or six hundred years, and no one
had ventured to complain further, particularly in view of Caesar's
comments upon the horrid details of his incarceration published
several years after his release, under the title of "Two Centuries in
an Oven; or, Four Thousand and Six in the Shade."

At the end of the eighteenth century, however, the aspect of affairs
had changed.  Apollyon had spent a great deal of his time abroad, and
had failed to note how the revolution in America, the Reign of Terror
in France, and the subsequent wars in Europe had materially increased
the forces of the Republican Party in Hades.  The French arrivals
alone should have been sufficient to convince Apollyon that his
attention to domestic affairs was needed, and that the
Americanization of his domain was gaining a most considerable
headway.  All the movement really needed was a leader, but there was
none to lead.

"Caesar's book has made us timid.  I don't want any of it," said
Alcibiades.

"I've had enough of public life," said Charlemagne.

"It's hot enough for us as it is," said all four of the "Three
Musketeers."

"We'll have to get somebody who is not aware of the possibilities of
our climate," observed Frederick the Great.

"Try Napoleon Bonaparte," suggested Louis XIV., with a chuckle,
feeling that here was an opportunity to do one of two things, to get
even with Apollyon, or, in case of the failure of the rebellion, to
be revenged upon Bonaparte for his treatment of the Bourbons by
securing for him the warmest reception the Kingdom of Hades could
afford.

The suggestion, according to documents at hand which seem to be
veracious, was adopted with enthusiasm.  The exile was communicated
with, and joy settled upon the people of Hades when word was received
that Bonaparte was on his way.  As we have seen, on the night of the
5th of May he left St. Helena, and on the 10th he landed on the right
bank of the Styx.  A magnificent army awaited him.  To the Old Guard,
many of whom had preceded him, was accorded the position of honor,
and as Bonaparte stepped ashore the roof of Erebus was rent with
vivas.  Such a scene has never been witnessed before, and may never
be witnessed again.  The populace flocked about him, and strove to
kiss his hand; some went so far as to clip off samples of his uniform
to treasure in their homes.  It was evident that the government must
look to itself.

"What is this noise?" asked Apollyon, who had returned to his domain
only the night before.

"Bonaparte has arrived," returned the head Imp, "and the people are
in revolt."

Apollyon paled and summoned his ministers.

Meanwhile Bonaparte had held a council of war, appointing Caesar,
Pompey, Alcibiades, and Charlemagne marshals of Hades.

"The first thing to be done is to capture the coal-yards," he said,
taking in the situation at a glance.  "Caesar, let the coal-yards be
your care.  Alcibiades will take the Three Musketeers, and by night
will make a detour to the other side of the palace and open the
sluices of the vitriol reservoir, which I understand run into the
Styx.  Pompey will surprise the stokers in the national engine-room
with a force of ten thousand, put out the fires, and await further
orders.  Charlemagne will accompany me with the army to the palace,
where I shall demand an audience with the king."

It will be seen at once that, granting the success of all these
manoeuvres, Apollyon could not possibly hold out.  As the Hollanders
had only water with which to flood their country and rout their
enemies, so Apollyon had only fire with which to wither an invader or
a rebellious force.  The quick mind of Bonaparte took this in on the
instant.  He was no longer listless and sleepy, for here was the
grandest opportunity of his life, and he knew it.

Fortune favored him.  In Hades fortune was a material personality,
and not an abstract idea as she is with us, and when she met
Bonaparte on his triumphal march along the Styx, she yielded to that
fascination which even phlegmatic Englishmen could not deny that he
possessed; and when at this meeting the man of the hour took her by
the hand and breathed softly into her ear that she was in very truth
the only woman he had ever loved, she instinctively felt that he had
at last spoken from his heart of hearts.

"I believe you, Bonaparte," she murmured softly, "and I think I have
shown you in the past that I am not indifferent to you.  I am with
you--Apollyon is doomed."

Thus encouraged, Bonaparte, followed by his constantly growing army,
proceeded to the palace.

Apollyon received him with dignity.

"I am glad to receive so distinguished a person," he said.

"Thank you," said Bonaparte, "but this is not a society function,
Your Highness--I have come here on business, so spare me your
flatteries."

Apollyon turned purple with rage.

"Insolent!" he cried.  "Consider yourself under arrest."

"Certainly," said Bonaparte, calmly.  "Will you kindly hand me your
crown?"

Apollyon rose in his wrath, and ordered his aides to arrest
Bonaparte, and to cast him into the furnace.  "Make it a million
degrees Farenheit," he roared.

"I regret to inform your majesty," said the chief aide, "that word
has just been received that the fires are out, the coal-yard has been
captured by the rebels, and five adventurous spirits have let all the
vitriol out of the reservoir into the Styx."

"Summon my guards, and have this man boned, then!" raged Apollyon.

"It is also with regret that I have to tell you," returned the aide,
"that the Royal Guard has gone over to the enemy, having been
promised higher wages."

"We have Cerberus left," cried Apollyon, "let him take this base
intruder and tear him limb from limb."

Napoleon burst out into a laugh.  "You will excuse me, Your Majesty,"
he said.  "But Cerberus is already fixed.  We poisoned two of his
heads, and he is even now whining for his life with the third."

"Then am I undone," moaned Apollyon, covering his face with his
hands.

"You are," said Bonaparte, "but we'll tie you up again in short
order.  We'll put you on one of your own gridirons and do you to a
turn."

Of course this was the end.

In three days Napoleon had made himself master of the kingdom, had
proclaimed the Empire with himself at its head.  Apollyon was treated
with consideration.  His life was spared, but he was shorn of his
power.  Bonaparte sent him into exile at Paris, where, according to
report, he still lives.

"Now for a new coronation," said the victor.  "Send for the pope."

"Not this tune!" cried Caesar with a laugh.  "The popes have always
studiously avoided this place."

"Then," said Napoleon with a smile, "let Fortune crown me.  After
all, it has always been she who did it--why not now?"

Hence it was that at the dawning of New Year's day of 1822, Napoleon
Bonaparte opened a new and most highly successful career.  His power
has increased day by day until now, when there is evidence that he
has the greater part of the world in his firm grasp.

Some years later his beloved Bourrienne arrived.

"Remember, Bourrienne," he said, as he installed his old and faithful
secretary in his new office, "you have always written my autographs
for me, and shall still continue to do so, only please note the
change.  It is no longer Bonaparte, or Napoleon, Emperor of the
French, it has become Napollyon, Emperor of Hades."

And to Fouche, when that worthy arrived, he said:

"Fouche, this is different from the old show.  That original Empire
of mine was ruined by just one thing.  I was eternally anxious to
provide for the succession, and out of that grew all my troubles; but
here, as the little girl said about the apple-core, there ain't a-
goin' to be no succession.  I am here to stay.  Meanwhile, Fouche, I
have an impression that you and Augureau took more pleasure out of my
misfortunes than I did; wherefore I authorize you to send for
Augereau and take him swimming in the vitriol tank.  It will do you
both good."

As for Joseph, when he heard of his brother's new acquisition he
reformed at once, led an irreproachable life in America, whither he
had fled, and when he died went to the other place.



Footnote:

{1}  Napoleon's English at this time was not of the best quality









This Etext Prepared by Alan Earls <alanearls@mediaone.net>





Ballads of Peace in War

by Michael Earls




HIS LIGHT

Gray mist on the sea,
And the night coming down,
She stays with sorrow
In a far town.

He goes the sea-ways
By channel lights dim,
Her love, a true light,
Watches for him.

They would be wedded
On a fair yesterday,
But the quick regiment
Saw him away.

Gray mist in her eyes
And the night coming down:
He feels a prayer
>From a far town.

He goes the sea-ways,
The land lights are dim;
She and an altar light
Keep watch for him.







1








THE COUNTERSIGN


Along Virginia's wondering roads
While armies hastened on,
To Beauregard's great Southern host,
Manassas fields upon,
Came Colonel Smith's good regiment,
Eager for Washington.

But Colonel Smith must halt his men
In a dangerous delay,
Though well he knows the countryside
To the distant host of grey.
He cannot join with Beauregard
For Bull Run's bloody fray.

And does he halt for storm or ford,
Or does he stay to dine?
Say, No! but death will meet his men,
Onward if moves the line:
He dares not hurry to Beauregard,
Not knowing the countersign.

Flashed in the sun his waving sword;
"Who rides for me?" he cried,
"And ask of the Chief the countersign,
Upon a daring ride;
Though never the lad come back again
With the good that will betide.

"I will send a letter to Beauregard,"
The Colonel slowly said;
"The bearer dies at the pickets' line,
But the letter shall be read
When the pickets find it for the Chief,
In the brave hand of the dead."








2








The Countersign


"Ready I ride to the Chief for the sign,"
Said little Dan O'Shea,
"Though never I come from the picket's line,
But a faded suit of grey:
Yet over my death will the road be safe,
And the regiment march away."

"In a mother's name, I bless thee, lad,"
The Colonel drew him near:
"But first in the name of God," said Dan,
"And then is my mother's dear---
Her own good lips that taught me well,
With the Cross of Christ no fear."

Quickly he rode by valley and hill,
On to the outpost line,
Till the pickets arise by wall and mound,
And the levelled muskets shine;
"Halt!" they cried, "count three to death,
Or give us the countersign."

Lightly the lad leaped from his steed,
No fear was in his sigh,
But a mother's face and a home he loved
Under an Irish sky:
He made the Sign of the Cross and stood,
Bravely he stood to die.

Lips in a prayer at the blessed Sign,
And calmly he looked around,
And wonder seized his waiting soul
To hear no musket sound,
But only the pickets calling to him,
Heartily up the mound.

For this was the order of Beauregard
Around his camp that day---
The Sign of the Cross was countersign,
(And a blessing to Dan O'Shea)
And the word came quick to Colonel Smith
For the muster of the grey.


3








A HILL O' LIGHTS


Turn from Kerry crossroads and leave the wooded dells,
Take the mountain path and find where Tip O'Leary dwells;
Tip O'Leary is the name, I sing it all day long,
And every bird whose heart is wise will have it for a song.

Tip O'Leary keeps the lights of many lamps aglow,
Little matters it to him the seasons come or go,
Sure if spring is in the air his hedges are abloom,
And fairy buds like candles shine across his garden room.

Roses in the June days are light the miles around,
Tapers of the fuchsias move along the August ground,
Sumachs light the flaming torches by October's grave
And like the campfires on the hills the oaks and maples wave.

All the lights but only one die out when summer goes,
One that Tip O'Leary keeps is brighter than the rose,
Through the window comes the bloom on any winter night,
And every sense goes wild to it, soft and sweet and bright.

Lamps are fair that have the light from flowers all day long,
When the birds are here and sing the Tip O'Leary song,
But a winter window is the fairest rose of all,
When Tip O'Leary's hearth is lit and lamps upon the wall.


















4








OFF TO THE WAR

(For Jack)


In a little ship and down the bay,
Out to the calling sea,
A young brave lad sailed off today,
To the one great war went he:
The one long war all men must know
Greater than land or gold,
Soul is the prince and flesh the foe
Of a kingdom Christ will hold.

With arms of faith and hope well-wrought
The brave lad went away,
And the voice of Christ fills all his thought,
Under two hands that pray:
The tender love of a mother's hands
That guarded all his years,
Fitted the armor, plate and bands,
And blessed them with her tears.


Older than Rhodes and Ascalon
And the farthest forts of sea,
Is the Master voice that calls him on
>From the hills in Galilee:
>From hills where Christ in gentle guise
Called, as He calls again,
With His heart of love and His love-lit eyes
Unto His warrior men.

Christ with the brave young lad to-day
Who goes to the sweet command,
Strengthen his heart wherever the way,
Whether he march or stand:
And whether he die in a peaceful cell,
Or alone in the lonely night,
The Cross of Christ shall keep him well,
And be his death's delight.





5








THE TOWERS OF HOLY CROSS

(For W. M. Letts)


The roads look up to Holy Cross,
The sturdy towers look down,
And show a kindly word to all
Who pass by Worcester Town;
And once you'd see the boys at play,
Or marching cap and gown.

The gallant towers at Holy Cross
Are silent night and day,
A few young lads are left behind
Who still may take their play;
The Cross and Flag look out afar
For them that went away.

And mine are gone, says Beaven Hall,
To camps by hill and plain,
And mine along by Newport Sea,
Says the high tower of O'Kane;
I follow mine, Alumni calls,
Across the watery main.

Their sires were in the old Brigade
That won at Fontenoy,
Stood true at Washington's right hand,
that were his faith and joy:
>From Holy Cross to Fredericksburg
Is many a gallant boy.

Then God be with you, says the Cross,
And the brave towers looking down;
I'll be your cloth, sings out the Flag,
For other cap and gown,
And may we see you safe again,
On the hills of Worcester Town.







6








ALWAYS MAYTIME

   (for  Gerry)


When May has spent its little song,
And richer comes the June,
Through former eyes the heart will long
For May again in tune;
Though large with promise hope may be,
By future visions cast,
Our memoried thoughts will yearn to see
The happy little past.

And you, my loyal little friend,
(From May to June you go),
What years of loyalty attend
Great comradeship we know;
Yet joy have me in place of tears
To see your road depart,
For whether east or west your years,
A friend stays home at heart.

Then gladly let the Springtime pass
And Summer in its wake;
Ahead are fields of flower and grass
All fragrant for your sake:
With hearts of joy we say farewell,
With laughter, wave and nod,
It's always May for us who dwell
In seasons close to God.














7








THE STORYTELLER


Tim of the Tales they call me,
With a welcome heart and hand;
But little they hold my brother
For all his cattle and land.

If I be walking the high road
>From Clare that goes to the sea,
A troop of the young run leaping
To gather a story from me.

Tim of the Tales, the folk say,
Is known the world around,
For children by taking his stories
To their homes in foreign ground.

I pity my brother his fortunes,
And how he sits alone,
With the money that keeps his body,
But leaves his heart a stone.

And sometimes do I be feeling
A dream of death in my ear,
And a heaven of children calling,
"Tim of the Tales is here."


















8








MY FATHER'S TUNES


My father had the gay good tunes, the like you'd seldom hear,
A whole day could he whistle them, an' thin he'd up an' sing,
The merry tunes an' twists o'them that suited all the year,
An' you wouldn't ask but listen if yourself stood there a king.
Early of a mornin' would he give "The Barefoot Boy" to us,
An' later on "The Rocky Road" or maybe "Mountain Lark,"
"Trottin' to the Fair" was a liltin' heart of joy to us,
An' whin we heard "The Coulin" sure the night was never dark.

An' what's the good o' foolish tunes, the moilin' folks 'ud say,
It's better teach the children work an' get the crock o' gold;
Thin sorra take their wisdom whin it makes them sad an' gray,--
A man is fitter have a song that never lets him old.
A stave of "Gillan's Apples" or a snatch of "Come Along With Me"
Will warm the cockles o' your heart, an' life will keep its prime.
Yarra, gold is all the richer whin it's "Danny, sing a song for me"
Or what's the good o' money if you're dead afore your time.

It's sense to do your turn o' work, it's healthy to be wise,
An' have the little crock o' gold agin the day o' rain;
But whin the ground is heaviest, your heart will feel the skies,
If you know a little Irish song to lift the road o' pain.
The learnin' an' the wealth we have are never sad an' gray with us,
The dullest times in all the year are merry as the June:
For we've the heart to up an' sing "Arise, an' come away with us,"
The way my father gave it, an' we laughin' in the tune.
















9








A SONG

(For John McCormack)


June of the trees in glory,
June of the meadows gay!
O, and it works a story
To tell an October day.

Blooms of the apple and cherry
Toil for the far-off hours;
Never is idleness merry,
In song of the garden bowers.

Brooks to the sea from mountains,
Yea, and from field and vine:
Rain and the sun are fountains
That gather for wheat and wine.

Cellar and loft shall glory,
Table and hearth shall praise,
Hearing October's story
Of June and the merry days.






















10








A BALLAD OF FRANCE


Ye who heed a nation's call
And speed to arms therefor,
Ye who fear your children's march
To perils of the war,--
Soldiers of the deck and camp
And mothers of our men,
Hearken to a tale of France
And tell it oft again.

*     *     *

In the east of France by the roads of war,
(God save us evermore from Mars and Thor!}
Up and down the fair land iron armies came,
(Pity, Jesu, all who fell, calling Thy name).

Pleasant all the fields were round every town,
Garden airs went sweetly up, heaven smiled down;
Till under leaden hail with flaming breath,
Graves and ashen harvest were the keep of death.

One little town stood, white on a hill,
Chapel and hostel gates, farms and windmill,
Chapel and countryside met the gunner's path,
Till no blade of kindly grass hid from his wrath.

Lo! When the terrain cleared out of murky air,
When mid the ruins stalked death and despair,
One figure stood erect, bright with day,--
Christ the Crucified, though His Cross was shot away.

Flame and shot tore away all the tender wood,
Yet with arms uplifted Christ His Figure stood;
Out reached the blessing hands, meek bowed the head,
Christ! The saving solace o'er the waste of dead.








11








A Ballad of France


France tells the story, make our hearts know well,
Christ His Figure stands against the gates of hell:
Flame and shot may rive the fortress walls apart,
Christ the Crucified will heal the breaking heart.

Wear Him day and night, wherever be the war,
(God save us evermore from Mars and Thor!)
Flag and heart that keep Him fear not shot and flame,
(Strengthen, Jesu, all who stand, calling Thy name).

     *     *     *

Ye who guard a nation's call
And speed to arms therefor,
Ye who pray for brave lads gone
To perils of the war;
Soldiers of the fleet and fort
And mothers of our men,
In the shadow of the Cross
Shall we find peace again.























12








TO ONE IN SUCCESS


A world's new faces greet you,
Ten thousand quick with praise,
But truer stay to meet you
Old friends and other days:
Let fickle changes hurt you,
(The new go quick apart)
One fame shall ne'er desert you
In true hearts like this heart.


































13








THE LIFELONG WAR


Still goes the strife; the anguish does not die.
Stronger the flesh is grown from earthy years,
In siege about my soul that upward peers
To see and hold its Good.  The spirit's eye
Approves the better things; but senses spy
The passing sweets, spurning the present fears,
And take their moment's prize.  Ah, then hot tears
Deluge my soul, and contrite moans my cry!

Courage, my heart: bright patience to the end!
Few years remain; then goes the warring wall
Of sensely flesh, that men will throw to earth.
So be it; so the contrite soul shall wend
A homeward way unto the Captain's call,
Eternally to know contrition's worth.



























14








LINDEN LANE

 HOLY CROSS: MAY, 1917

(For Major Joseph W. O'Connor, '03)


Birds are merry and the buds
Come along with May:
Lonely is the linden land
For lads that went today.

What calls the May of song
But the fair young spring?
Heard our boys another tune
Sterner voices sing.

Bugles blew by land and sea,
And the tocsin drum;
See, brave hearts go down the hill,
Shouting, "Hail, we come."

>From the towers that show the Cross,
Staunch the Flag waved out,
And the royal Purple shook
Joyous with the shout.

Heigh-ho! And a lusty cheer,
Down the linden lane:
The pine grove looked but cannot tell
If they'll come home again.

Few may take the homeward road
When the war is done:
Where they fall or when they come,
Hail, to the cause they won.

Till the buds and the merry birds
Come another May,
Cross and Flag aloft shall bless
Brave lads who went today.





15








THE BOUNDARIES OF A HOUSE


Along the north a mountain crest,
A row of trees runs towards the west;
The south is all a field for play,
For work the east has marked a way;
The night shows all the stars above,
And the long, long day, a mother's love.





































16








ATTAINMENT


Let me go back again.  There is the road,
O memory! The humble garden lane
So young with me.  Let me rebuild again
The start of faith and hope by that abode;
Amend with morning freshness all the code
Of youth's desire; remap my chart's demesne
With tuneful joy, and plan a far campaign
For better marches in ambition's mode.

Ah, no, my heart! More certain now the skies
For joy abide: the cage of tree and sod,
Horizons firm that faith and hope attain,
Far realms of innocence in children's eyes,
And hearts harmonious with the will of God:--
These might I miss if I were back again.




























17








THE PHILOSOPHERS


The best of true philosophers
Are the children, after all,--
The children with laughing hearts
And the serious field and ball:
They have a bowl and bubbles,
And hours where rainbows are;
They find, if ever the sun is hid,
In every dark a star.

But, O, the sorry men that make
The wise books of our day!
They cannot smile athwart a cloud,
When black thoughts lead astray;
They cannot add a simple sum,
But talk like drunken men,
And shut their eyes to keep out God
When spring comes in again.

Far simpler than the Rule of Three
Are the laws of earth and sky;
Yet fools will muddle all true thought,
And pride will have its cry;
The banners with their deadly words
Go reeling on unfurled,
And sin and sadness march along
To the heartbreak of the world.
















18








The Philosophers


But the children are the wise men,
With the clearest heart and mind;
If two and one are three, they say,
Then truth is near to find;
If this be now that once was not,
If things must have a cause,
Then very simple is the sum
That God is in His laws.

The world's men that are fools enough,
They will not speak that way,
But with a cloud of muddled thought
They hide the light of day;
Yet laughing words and candid truth
Abide by field and hall,
Where the best of true philosophers
Are the children, after all.


























19








PREPAREDNESS

~~~~~~~~~~

I.

THE DRUMMER BOY

You never know when war may come,
And that is why I keep a drum:
	For if all sudden in the night
	From east or west came battle fright,
	And you were sound asleep in bed,
	And very soon to join the dead,
	You then would gladly wish my drum
	Would warn you that the war had come.

So that is why on afternoons
I tell the neighborhood my tunes:
	Sometimes behind a fortress bench,
	Or where the hedges make a trench,
	I beat the drum with all my might,
	While people look with awful fright,
	Just as they would if war had come,
	And heard the warning of my drum.

	They must be thankful, I am sure,
	Because they now may feel secure,
	And rest so safe and sound in bed,
	Without wild dreams of fearful dread;
	For now they hear me all the day,
	As round the yard I march and play,
	To let them know if war should come
	They'll get the warning of my drum.


~~~~~~~~~~








20








Preparedness


II.

THE SAILOR

A sailor that rides the ocean wave,
And I in my room at home:
	Where are the seas I fear to brave,
	Or the lands I may not roam?
	At the attic window I take my stand,
	And tighten the curtain sail,
	Then, ahoy!  I ride the leagues of land,
	Whether in calm or gale.

Tree at anchor along the road
Bow as I speed along;
	At sunny brooks in the valley I load
	Cargoes of blossom and song;
	Stories I take on the passing wind
	From the plains and forest seas,
	And the Golden Fleece I yet will find,
	And the fruit of Hesperides.

	Steady I keep my watchful eyes,
	As I range the thousand miles,
	Till evening tides in western skies
	Turn gold the cloudland isles;
	Then fast is the hatch and dark the screen,
	And I bring my cabin light;
	With a wink I change to a submarine
	And drop in the sea of Night.













21








WAR IN THE NORTH


Not from Mars and not from Thor
Comes the war, the welcome war,
Many months we waited for
To free us from the bondage
Of Winter's gloomy reign:
Valor to our hope is bound,
Songs of courage loud resound,
Vowed is Spring to win her ground
Through all our northern country,
>From Oregon to Maine.

All our loyal brave allies
In the Southlands mobilize,
Faith is sworn to our emprise,
The scouting breezes whisper
That help is sure today:
Vanguards of the springtime rains
Cannonade the hills and plains,
Freeing them from Winter's chains,
So birds and buds may flourish
Around the throne of May.

Hark! and hear the clarion call
Bluebirds give by fence and wall!
Look!  The darts of sunlight fall,
And red shields of the robins
Ride boldly down the leas;
Hail!  The cherry banners shine,
Onward comes the battle line,--
On!  White dogwood waves the sign,
And exile troops of blossoms
Are sailing meadow seas.










22









War in the North



Winter's tyrant king retires;
Spring leads on her legion choirs
Where the hedges sound their lyres;
The victor hills and valleys
Ring merrily the tune:
April cohorts guard the way
For the great enthroning day,
When the Princess of May
Shall wed within our northlands
The charming Prince of June.































23








THE HAPPY TIME


Two gloomy scenes may be,
Or count you three:
	A building hope all crushed at morn,
	A bridal day in clouds of rain,
	And night that keeps a mother's pain
	For tidings of a child forlorn.

Of happy times count more,
Admit these four:
	A flower of promise rich with day,
	A son with victories that wear
	A halo on his mother's way:
	And friends whose hearts ring like a chime
	Across the world at Christmas time.




























24








THE TIME OF TRUCE


Two young lads from childhood up
Drank together friendship's cup:
Joe was glad with Bill at play,
Bill was home to Joe alway.

On their friendship came the blight
Of a little thoughtless fight;
Then, alas! each passing day
Farther bore these friends away.

There was grief in either heart,
Bleeding deep from sorrow's dart,
When in thoughtfulness again
Each beheld the other's pain.

But the shades of night are furled
When the morning takes the world,
And the Christmas days of peace
Make our little quarrels cease.

Bill and Joe on Christmas Day
Met as in the olden way;
Bill put out his hand to Joe,--
It was Christmas Day, you know.

Bill and Joe are friends again,
And to them long years remain;
Time may take them far away,
They keep Christmas every day.













25








BETHLEHEM


O ye who sail Potomac's even tide
To Vernon's shades, our Chieftain's hallowed mound;
Or who at distant shrines high paeans sound
In Alfred's cult, old England's morning pride;
Or seek Versailles, conceited as a bride,
With garish memories of kins strewn round;
Or lay your spirit's cheek on Forum ground,
For here a mighty Caesar lived and died:
To these and other stones, O ye who speed,
Since there, forsooth, a prince was passing great,
More zealous let your heart's adoring heed
The Child most Royal in a crib's estate.
No poor so poor, no king more king than He:
Come, better pilgrims, to this mystery.




























26








A VOW-DAY FLOWER

(POVERTY, CHASTITY, OBEDIENCE)


Three little leaves like shamrock,
And the trefoil's love-lit eyes,
Whether it takes the sunshine
Or the shadows from the skies.

And richer than rose or lily
Is the flower he wears today,
With triune bloom and fragrance
>From earth to heaven alway.

Poverty is the low leaf,
And one is chastely white,
And the red love of obedience
Goes up to God a light.

Grow, good flower, and keep him
Who wears your bloom today,
Shadow and sunshine bless him,
And the trefoil's heavenward way.






















27








THE TREE IN THE TENEMENT YARD

(For T. A. Daly)


America, Ireland and Italy,
All have known this poor old tree.

*     *     *

A rickety fence goes round the yard
And the noisy streets stand high:
The grassless ground is brown and hard,
And the cinder pathways, lined with shard,
Sees but a bit of sky.

Once the yard was fertile and fair,
And lilac bushes near:
And a Yankee counted with fretful care,
Under the solacing shadows there,
The gain of every year.

The crowded walls of trade arose
And gloomed the avenue:
But a Munster man at each day's close
Built in the tree his hope's rainbows,
And saw his dreams come true.

The years have thickened the darkened air,
But the tree is still on guard:
It comforts the young Italian there,
Who sees the future blossoming fair
>From the tree in the tenement yard.

*     *     *

America, Ireland and Italy
All have loved this poor old tree.








28








OLD HUDSON ROVERS

(For Joyce Kilmer)


When the dreamy night is on, up the Hudson river,
And the sheen of modern taste is dim and far away,
Ghostly men on phantom rafts make the waters shiver,
Laughing in the sibilance of the silver spray.
Yea, and up the woodlands, staunch in moonlit weather,
Go the ghostly horsemen, adventuresome to ride,
White as mist the doublet-braize, bandolier and feather,
Fleet as gallant Robin Hood in an eventide.

Times are gone that knew the craft in the role of rovers,
Fellows of the open, care could never load:
Unalarmed for bed or board, they were leisure's lovers,
Summer bloomed in story on the Hyde Park Road.
Summer was a blossom, but the fruit was autumn,
Fragrant haylofts for a bed, cider-cakes in store,
Warmer was a cup they know, when the north wind caught 'em
Down at Benny Havens' by the West Point shore.

Idlers now-and loafers pass, joy is out of fashion,
Honest fun that fooled a dog or knew a friendly gate,
Now the craft are vagabonds, sick with modern passion,
Riding up and down the shore, on an aching freight;
Sullen are the battered looks, cheerless talk or tipsy,
Sickly in the smoky air, starving in the day,
Pining for a city's noise at Kingston or Po'keepsie,
Eager more for Gotham and a great White Way.

Rich is all the countryside, but glory has departed,
What if yachts and mansions be, by the river's marge!
Dim though was a hillside, lamps were happy-hearted,
Near the cove of Rondout in a hut or barge.
Silken styles are tyrants, fashion kills the playtime,
Robs the heart of largess that is kindly to the poor,
Richer were the freemen, welcome as the Maytime,
Glad was boy or maiden, seeing Brennan of the moor.






29








Old Hudson Rovers


Send us back the olden knights, tell no law to track 'em,
Give to boy and maid the storytellers as of yore,
Millionaires in legend-wealth, though no bank would back 'em,
But old Benny Havens by the West Point Shore.
Off with lazy vagabonds, social ghosts that shiver,
Give to worthy road-men the great green way,
And we'll hear a song again up the Hudson river,
Ringing from a drifting raft, set in silver spray.



































30








A WINTER MINSTER

(For Fr. C. L. O'Donnell)


The interlacing trees
Arise in Gothic traceries,
As if a vast cathedral deep and dim;
And through the solemn atmosphere
The low winds hymn
Such thoughts as solitude will hear.
To lead your way across
Gray carpet aisles of moss
Unto the chantry stalls,
The sumach candelabra are alight;
Along the cloister walls,
Like chorister and acolyte,
The shrubs are vested white;
The dutiful monastic oak
In his gray-friar cloak
Keeps penitential ways
And solemn orisons of praise;
For beads upon the cincture-vine
Red berries warm with color shine,
And to their constant rosary
The bedesmen firs incline;
And fair as frescoes be
Among the shrines of Italy,
These lights and shadows are,
Impalpable in gray and green
Upon the hills afar
And the gold westering sun between.
The music!  Hark!
Oh, an it be no rapturous lark,
Yet has the lesser chant
The blessedness of song.
The snowbird mendicant
Intones the antiphon-
Et laboremus nos;





31








A Winter Minster


And all the grottoed aisles along,
Where servitors rejoice,
The chorused echoes run-

Oremus nos.

The inspiration of the breeze
Gives every reed a voice
>From tenebrae and silences;
Over the valleys borne,
Come organ harmonies;
And when the low winds call,
The pines with miserere mourn
A requiem musical,
Softer than moonbeams fall
Across the starry oriels of night,
Flooding the azure round
With hushed delight
And sanctity of sound.
























32








THE DARK LITTLE ROSE

IRELAND


When shall we find the spring come in,
And the fragrant air it blows?
And when shall the bounty of summer win
Fairer than fields of Camolin
For the dark little Rose?

Long was the winter, the storms how long!
What flower may live i' the snows!
No bloom shall last under heels of wrong,
If the heart-blood be not deathless strong,
As the dark little Rose.

Sing hers the culture sweeter than rain
That healed old Europe's woes;
Older than bowers of Lille and Louvain
Grew by the Rhine and the towns of Spain
>From the dark little Rose.

Leagues in the sunlight never shall fail
While the broad, round ocean flows;
Though never a fleet goes up Kinsale,
See, all the world is within the pale
Of the dark little Rose.


















33








THE MONK MAELANFAID


Maelanfaid saw a tiny bird
A-grieving on the ground,
And O, the sad lament he heard,
That sorrow's self might sound:
He could not read a note or word
The song of grief inwound.

Maelanfaid went within his cell
To keep a fast and pray,
To listen to a voice would tell
The mystery away:
What was the red long pain befell
The bird of grief all day?

"Maelanfaid," airy voices call,
"MacOcha Molv is dead,
Who killed no creature great or small,
Who helped all life instead:
Now griefs of bird and blossom fall
Around his funeral bed."






















34








THE YOUNG ADVENTURERS


We will go adventuring, will you come adventuring,
Hail, to all who sail with us the seven pleasant seas:
All the shores with lily bells, all the flutes of woodland dells
Are calling like a legend upon a fragrant breeze.

Throw away the haughty cares, children here are millionaires,
Laughter take for baggage and give your laugh a song;
We must sail the seas of grass, round the isles of clover pass,
And delve in leagues of shadowland, when clouds come along.

Caves are walled with treasure trove, rich as any south-sea cove,
Bullion of the meadow where the gold sun flows;

Round the reefs of mignonette, up the waves of violet,
Fragrant go our sails and spars with attar of the rose.

On, gay adventurers, bravely ride the billowy furze,
Golden foil and dewy pearls are swaying to a tune:
Quaff the brew of red raspberry through the vine veils gossamery.
Till we turn when night comes down alleys of the moon.

Yea, with laughter in our sails and our hearts a book of tales,
Down the silver roadways, a homeward hymn we say:--
Praise the Lord ye great and small, flower and weed majestical,
For pleasant seas that God gave adventurers today.
















35








THE FOUNTAIN OF YOUTH

(For Osceola and Pocahontas)


Was it a hundred years ago,
Or was it but yesterday,
When we found the roads that grow
Blossom and song of May?
Maybe it was but yesterday,
Or a hundred years ago.

The roads from Bersabee to Dan
Are old and quickly tire,
But to the heart of child or man
Youth is a fairy fire:
Our youthful roads, they never tire
>From Bersabee to Dan.

Ponce de Leon found no spring,
But legend's long, long ruth;
But the grace of God is a magic thing
Abides with chivalrous youth:
The grace of God that brings no ruth
For them who find the spring.

There is a land, there is a May
Beyond the graveyard tree;
Ten thousand years are like a day
Of a youth that we shall see:
Our young hearts pass the graveyard tree
To a land forever in May.














36








THE BONNIE PRINCE O' SPRING


The little green soldiers are here at last,
With their waving blades and spears;
And across the hills they are marching fast
With the drill of a thousand years:
And I wave afar, and I shout, Hurrah!
Till I hear their echoing cheers.

A bonnie prince is at their head,
And his love the legions know:
For he gives them rest where the twigs are red
At the hedges cool in a row:
And afoot are they soon to a birdlike tune
On the northward march to go.

Oh, I am leal to the marching men,
To my bonnie Prince I'm true;
For he tells me the way to his tented glen,
And the secret password too:
And he sets in my hair a blossom to wear,
Like his own good horsemen do.

Then I will follow on all the day
Where the bonnie Prince has led,
Till we drive the Winter foeman away
And throne my Prince instead:
And sing willaloo! With the birds, willaloo!
For the Winter King is dead.















37








ON A TRAIN

(For Christine and Tom)


Oases are charming 'mid the Afric sands,
Beautiful is summer after rain;
But the sweetest blossoms may be eyes and hands,
And two playful children on a train.

Aileen and her brother, home from holiday,
Left behind them Narragansett town;
Innocence like music followed all the way,
Summer glowed upon the cheeks of brown.

She that was their escort read a magazine:
They were young, and trains are dull at night;
All the passing signals, red and blue and green,
Counted up the miles for young delight.

I was there behind them, earnest in a book:
Lo, the journey turned to fairyland,
When, like magic mirrors, dusty windows took
Aileen's dancing eyes and waving hand!

That is how it happened on a creeping train,
How a play began without a word,--
Peekaboo reflections in a window-pane,
Such a story-hour was never heard.

Aileen and her brother, strangers were to me;
They were friendly for the cloth I wore;
And through leagues of window, youthful play could see
We were friends to be for evermore.

So we passed the hamlets, passed the miles of night
In a fairyland of silent games,
Till the travel ended in the Worcester light,--
Yet we parted, strangers in our names.







38








On a Train


But   a fortnight later, by an autumn tree,
Aileen and her brother came my way,
And another, glad to tell the names of them and me,
And to hear how travellers can play.

Life is but a journey, say we evermore,
Passing lights the years have, like a train;
Three good friends will travel up to heaven's door,
With the world a merry window-pane.


































39








THE COLUMBINE


Gray lonely rocks about thee stand,
Ignored of sun and dew,
Yet is thy breath upon the land,
To thy vocation true.

So come they character to me
That works in sunless ways,
And I shall learn to give with thee
Dark hills a constant praise.

































40








TWO SEANICHIES

(For Aedh)


'Tis the queerest trade we have, the two of us that go about,
I that do the talkin', and the little lad that sings,
We to tell the story of a Land you ought to know about,--
The wonder land of Erin and the memories it brings.

Sure it is a wonder land, richer than the books it is,
Full of magic stories and a hopeful heart of song;
Faith, and near the mountains and the sunny lakes and brooks it is,
Like the olden seanichies, the pair of us belong.

Far and broad our journeyin' , up and down the land we go,
Today among the mountains and tomorrow by the sea;
Pleasant are the roads with us, and to a welcome grand we go,
Erin wins the heart of you, whoever you may be.

Erin's heart will capture you, if you will but listen now,
Great she was afore the Danes and all her Saxon foes,
After that the sorrows came, sure your eyes will glisten now,
Up, my lad, and sing for them "The Dark Little Rose."

Rest awhile and I will tell the fame of Tara's Hall to them,
All the deeds of valor and a thousand scenes of joy,
Wicklow hills and Derry fields where Killarney calls to them.
Come, my lad, it's Ninety-Eight and sing "The Croppy Boy."

Long ago the stranger came and learned to love the ways of her,
Irish more than Irish the Norman foe became;
Sure and here across the sea you give your hearts to praise of her,
The tear and smile within her eyes that ever are the same.

Not for gold or little fame the two of us to go about,
I that do the talkin', and the little lad that sings,
We to win your love for her, the Land you're glad to know about,
The wonder land of Erin and the memories it brings.






41








THE GREEN BRIGADE

ON THE FIELD OF CORN



Where is the war ye march unto,
>From the early tents of morn?
And what are the deeds ye hope to do,
Brave Grenadiers of Corn?
Pearls of the dew are on your hair,
And the jewels of morning light,
Pennants of green ye fling to the air,
And the tall plumes waving bright.

Gaily away and steady ye go,
Never a faltering line:
Forward!  I follow and try to know
Word of your countersign:
Hist!  The spies of the tyrant sun
Eagerly watch your plan,
Lavish with bribes of gold, they run
Down to your outmost man.

Steady, good lads, go bravely on
By the parching hills of pain,
An armor of shade ye soon may don
And meet the allies of rain:
And night in the bivouac hours will sing
Praise of the march ye made,
And into your pockets good gold will bring,
Men of the Green Brigade.

Yea, and upon September's field,
When the long campaign is done,
With arms up-stacked, your hearts will yield
Conquest of rain and sun:
The pennants and plumes will then be sere,
Your pearls delight no morn,
But tents of plenty will bless the year,
Brave Grenadiers of Corn.





42








ALLELUIA HEIGHT


Obedience to the seasons' marshall-rod,
That is a law of God,
Here beauty passes with her gorgeous train,
On paths that range from bud to grain.
O, here the searching eyes
In traffic for the soul's good gain
Earn wealth of rare delight.
Far pathways of surprise,
In color's frumenty bedight,
Lead off from avenues of day
Through miles of pageantries:
And from the starry chancels of the night
And the inscrutable farther skies,
Beyond where trackless comets stray,
Outspreads a world in thought's array.
And lo!  the heart's true voices sing
>From the exulting reverent breast,
And lips proclaim, with adoration blessed,
Glad Alleluias to the King.

Prompt is our praise unto a jewelled queen
In all her courtly splendor set,
(Fair as those fairylands are seen
By childhood's other sight):
But if in pauper mien,
Too poor for stray regret
Where crowded streets affright
She stood in beggary,
Unknown, though faithful to her high degree,--
O, then her praise  'twere easy to forget.
Yet ever here,
For all of time's prompt fickleness-
>From plenteous June and wide largess
Of full midsummer days,
To dwarf December pitiless
Amid the earth's uncomplimented ways-






43








Alleluia Height


Yea, constant through the changeful year,
This queenly Height commands our praise.
To stand in meek unflinching hardihood
When fortune blows its storm of fright,
And work to full effect that good
Resolved in open days of clearer sight-
O, this is worth!
That daily sees the soul
To braver liberties give birth,
That heeds not time's annoy,
And hears surrounding voices roll
Perennial circumstance of joy.
Then come not only when the springtime blows
The old familiar strangeness of its breath
Across the long-lain snows,
And chants her resurrected songs
About the tombs of death;
Nor yet when summer glows
In roseate throngs
And works her plenitude of deeds
By tangled dells and waving meads,
Come here in beauty's pilgrimage:
Nor when the autumn reads
Illuminate her page
With tints of magicry besprent
Of iridescent wonderment-
(As scrolls in old monastic towers,
Done in an earnest far-off age).
But choose to come in winter hours
To see how character can live,
How noble character will give
Through desolate distress
And cold neglect's duress,
The fulness of its powers
And win the soul its victor sign.
Yea, come when in a peasant gown,
Amid the ample banners of the pine,






44








Alleluia Height


And the resounding harpers of the vine,
Lone winter holds upon the Height
Her court in full renown.
Obedient her courtiers go,
Their gonfalons aloft and bright,
And scatter pearls of snow;
Her sturdy knighthood wear for crown
Prismatic sheen in young delight,
And wave the cedar oriflamme on high;
While windward heralds cry,
Across the battlements of earth
To parapets along the sky,
The lauds of character's full worth.

The winter passes and the days come in
Vibrant with spring.
And men find welcome at the Easter tomb,
Reward they win,
Who make their hearts with courage sing
Through Lenten opportunity of gloom:
(Not as the Pharisees,
With faces lacrimose,
Who wear pretence of ashen woes,
And murmur like the tuneless bees,
Whose honies are hypocrisies),
But men of character's delight,
Who like this valiant Height
Still serving through the bleakest day,
With humble offerings of sound and sight,
Do steadfast stand and pray:
O, count those souls of noble worth,
And God's good pleasure on His earth,
Who still, if joy or pain
Brings sun or rain,
Heroic sing
The law of Alleluia to the King.









Title: The Boss and the Machine, A Chronicle of the Politicians
and Party Organization

Author: Samuel P. Orth

THIS BOOK, VOLUME 43 IN THE CHRONICLES OF AMERICA SERIES, ALLEN
JOHNSON, EDITOR, WAS DONATED TO PROJECT GUTENBERG BY THE JAMES
J. KELLY LIBRARY OF ST. GREGORY'S UNIVERSITY; THANKS TO ALEV
AKMAN.




THE BOSS AND THE MACHINE, A CHRONICLE OF THE POLITICIANS
AND PARTY ORGANIZATION
BY SAMUEL P. ORTH

NEW HAVEN: YALE UNIVERSITY PRESS

TORONTO: GLASGOW, BROOK & CO.
LONDON: HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS

1919

CONTENTS

I. THE RISE OF THE PARTY
II. THE RISE OF THE MACHINE
III. THE TIDE OF MATERIALISM
IV. THE POLITICIAN AND THE CITY
V. TAMMANY HALL
VI. LESSER OLIGARCHIES
VII. LEGISLATIVE OMNIPOTENCE
VIII. THE NATIONAL HIERARCHY
IX. THE AWAKENING
X. PARTY REFORM
XI. THE EXPERT AT LAST

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

THE BOSS AND THE MACHINE

CHAPTER I. THE RISE OF THE PARTY

The party system is an essential instrument of Democracy.
Wherever government rests upon the popular will, there the party
is the organ of expression and the agency of the ultimate power.
The party is, moreover, a forerunner of Democracy, for parties
have everywhere preceded free government. Long before Democracy
as now understood was anywhere established, long before the
American colonies became the United States, England was divided
between Tory and Whig. And it was only after centuries of bitter
political strife, during which a change of ministry would not
infrequently be accompanied by bloodshed or voluntary exile, that
England finally emerged with a government deriving its powers
from the consent of the governed.

The functions of the party, both as a forerunner and as a
necessary organ of Democracy, are well exemplified in American
experience. Before the Revolution, Tory and Whig were party names
used in the colonies to designate in a rough way two ideals of
political doctrine. The Tories believed in the supremacy of the
Executive, or the King; the Whigs in the supremacy of Parliament.
The Tories, by their rigorous and ruthless acts giving effect to
the will of an un-English King, soon drove the Whigs in the
colonies to revolt, and by the time of the Stamp Act (1765) a
well-knit party of colonial patriots was organized through
committees of correspondence and under the stimulus of local
clubs called "Sons of Liberty." Within a few years, these
patriots became the Revolutionists, and the Tories became the
Loyalists. As always happens in a successful revolution, the
party of opposition vanished, and when the peace of 1783 finally
put the stamp of reality upon the Declaration of 1776, the
patriot party had won its cause and had served its day.

Immediately thereafter a new issue, and a very significant one,
began to divide the thought of the people. The Articles of
Confederation, adopted as a form of government by the States
during a lull in the nationalistic fervor, had utterly failed to
perform the functions of a national government. Financially the
Confederation was a beggar at the doors of the States;
commercially it was impotent; politically it was bankrupt. The
new issue was the formation of a national government that should
in reality represent a federal nation, not a collection of touchy
States. Washington in his farewell letter to the American people
at the close of the war (1783) urged four considerations: a
strong central government, the payment of the national debt, a
well-organized militia, and the surrender by each State of
certain local privileges for the good of the whole. His "legacy,"
as this letter came to be called, thus bequeathed to us
Nationalism, fortified on the one hand by Honor and on the other
by Preparedness.

The Confederation floundered in the slough of inadequacy for
several years, however, before the people were sufficiently
impressed with the necessity of a federal government. When,
finally, through the adroit maneuver of Alexander Hamilton and
James Madison, the Constitutional Convention was called in 1787,
the people were in a somewhat chastened mood, and delegates were
sent to the Convention from all the States except Rhode Island.

No sooner had the delegates convened and chosen George Washington
as presiding officer, than the two opposing sides of opinion were
revealed, the nationalist and the particularist, represented by
the Federalists and the Anti-Federalists, as they later termed
themselves. The Convention, however, was formed of the
conservative leaders of the States, and its completed work
contained in a large measure, in spite of the great compromises,
the ideas of the Federalists. This achievement was made possible
by the absence from the Convention of the two types of men who
were to prove the greatest enemy of the new document when it was
presented for popular approval, namely, the office-holder or
politician, who feared that the establishment of a central
government would deprive him of his influence, and the popular
demagogue, who viewed with suspicion all evidence of organized
authority. It was these two types, joined by a third--the
conscientious objector--who formed the AntiFederalist party to
oppose the adoption of the new Constitution. Had this opposition
been well-organized, it could unquestionably have defeated the
Constitution, even against its brilliant protagonists, Hamilton,
Madison, Jay, and a score of other masterly men.

The unanimous choice of Washington for President gave the new
Government a non-partizan initiation. In every way Washington
attempted to foster the spirit of an undivided household. He
warned his countrymen against partizanship and sinister political
societies. But he called around his council board talents which
represented incompatible ideals of government. Thomas Jefferson,
the first Secretary of State, and Alexander Hamilton, the first
Secretary of the Treasury, might for a time unite their energies
under the wise chieftainship of Washington, but their political
principles could never be merged. And when, finally, Jefferson
resigned, he became forthwith the leader of the opposition--not
to Washington, but to Federalism as interpreted by Hamilton, John
Adams, and Jay.

The name Anti-Federalist lost its aptness after the inauguration
of the Government. Jefferson and his school were not opposed to a
federal government. They were opposed only to its pretensions, to
its assumption of centralized power. Their deep faith in popular
control is revealed in the name they assumed,
Democratic-Republican. They were eager to limit the federal power
to the glorification of the States; the Federalists were
ambitious to expand the federal power at the expense of localism.
This is what Jefferson meant when he wrote to Washington as early
as 1792, "The Republican party wish to preserve the Government in
its present form." Now this is a very definite and fundamental
distinction. It involves the political difference between
government by the people and government by the representatives of
the people, and the practical difference between a government by
law and a government by mass-meeting.

Jefferson was a master organizer. At letter-writing, the one
means of communication in those days, he was a Hercules. His pen
never wearied. He soon had a compact party. It included not only
most of the Anti-Federalists, but the small politicians, the
tradesmen and artisans, who had worked themselves into a
ridiculous frenzy over the French Revolution and who despised
Washington for his noble neutrality. But more than these,
Jefferson won over a number of distinguished men who had worked
for the adoption of the Constitution, the ablest of whom was
James Madison, often called "the Father of the Constitution."

The Jeffersonians, thus representing largely the debtor and
farmer class, led by men of conspicuous abilities, proceeded to
batter down the prestige of the Federalists. They declared
themselves opposed to large expenditures of public funds, to
eager exploitation of government ventures, to the Bank, and to
the Navy, which they termed "the great beast with the great
belly." The Federalists included the commercial and creditor
class and that fine element in American life composed of leading
families with whom domination was an instinct, all led,
fortunately, by a few idealists of rare intellectual attainments.
And, with the political stupidity often characteristic of their
class, they stumbled from blunder to blunder. In 1800 Thomas
Jefferson, who adroitly coined the mistakes of his opponents into
political currency for himself, was elected President. He had
received no more electoral votes than Aaron Burr, that mysterious
character in our early politics, but the election was decided by
the House of Representatives, where, after seven days' balloting,
several Federalists, choosing what to them was the lesser of two
evils, cast the deciding votes for Jefferson. When the
Jeffersonians came to power, they no longer opposed federal
pretensions; they now, by one of those strange veerings often
found in American politics, began to give a liberal
interpretation to the Constitution, while the Federalists with
equal inconsistency became strict constructionists. Even
Jefferson was ready to sacrifice his theory of strict
construction in order to acquire the province of Louisiana.

The Jeffersonians now made several concessions to the
manufacturers, and with their support linked to that of the
agriculturists Jeffersonian democracy flourished without any
potent opposition. The second war with England lent it a doubtful
luster but the years immediately following the war restored
public confidence. Trade flourished on the sea. The frontier was
rapidly pushed to the Mississippi and beyond into the vast empire
which Jefferson had purchased. When everyone is busy, no one
cares for political issues, especially those based upon
philosophical differences. So Madison and Monroe succeeded to the
political regency which is known as the Virginia Dynasty.

This complacent epoch culminated in Monroe's "Era of Good
Feeling," which proved to be only the hush before the tornado.
The election of 1824 was indecisive, and the House of
Representatives was for a second time called upon to decide the
national choice. The candidates were John Quincy Adams, Andrew
Jackson, Henry Clay, and William H. Crawford. Clay threw his
votes to Adams, who was elected, thereby arousing the wrath of
Jackson and of the stalwart and irreconcilable frontiersmen who
hailed him as their leader. The Adams term merely marked a
transition from the old order to the new, from Jeffersonian to
Jacksonian democracy. Then was the word Republican dropped from
the party name, and Democrat became an appellation of definite
and practical significance.

By this time many of the older States had removed the early
restrictions upon voting, and the new States carved out of the
West had written manhood suffrage into their constitutions. This
new democracy flocked to its imperator; and Jackson entered his
capital in triumph, followed by a motley crowd of frontiersmen in
coonskin caps, farmers in butternut-dyed homespun, and hungry
henchmen eager for the spoils. For Jackson had let it be known
that he considered his election a mandate by the people to fill
the offices with his political adherents.

So the Democrats began their new lease of life with an orgy of
spoils. "Anybody is good enough for any job" was the favorite
watchword. But underneath this turmoil of desire for office,
significant party differences were shaping themselves. Henry
Clay, the alluring orator and master of compromise, brought
together a coalition of opposing fragments. He and his following
objected to Jackson's assumption of vast executive prerogatives,
and in a brilliant speech in the Senate Clay espoused the name
Whig. Having explained the origin of the term in English and
colonial politics, he cried: "And what is the present but the
same contest in another form? The partizans of the present
Executive sustain his favor in the most boundless extent. The
Whigs are opposing executive encroachment and a most alarming
extension of executive power and prerogative. They are contending
for the rights of the people, for free institutions, for the
supremacy of the Constitution and the laws."

There soon appeared three practical issues which forced the new
alignment. The first was the Bank. The charter of the United
States Bank was about to expire, and its friends sought a
renewal. Jackson believed the Bank an enemy of the Republic, as
its officers were anti-Jacksonians, and he promptly vetoed the
bill extending the charter. The second issue was the tariff.
Protection was not new; but Clay adroitly renamed it, calling it
"the American system." It was popular in the manufacturing towns
and in portions of the agricultural communities, but was bitterly
opposed by the slave-owning States.

A third issue dealt with internal improvements. All parts of the
country were feeling the need of better means of communication,
especially between the West and the East. Canals and turnpikes
were projected in every direction. Clay, whose imagination was
fervid, advocated a vast system of canals and roads financed by
national aid. But the doctrine of states-rights answered that the
Federal Government had no power to enter a State, even to spend
money on improvements, without the consent of that State. And, at
all events, for Clay to espouse was for Jackson to oppose.

These were the more important immediate issues of the conflict
between Clay's Whigs and Jackson's Democrats, though it must be
acknowledged that the personalities of the leaders were quite as
much an issue as any of the policies which they espoused. The
Whigs, however, proved unequal to the task of unhorsing their
foes; and, with two exceptions, the Democrats elected every
President from Jackson to Lincoln. The exceptions were William
Henry Harrison and Zachary Taylor, both of whom were elected on
their war records and both of whom died soon after their
inauguration. Tyler, who as Vice-President succeeded General
Harrison, soon estranged the Whigs, so that the Democratic
triumph was in effect continuous over a period of thirty years.

Meanwhile, however, another issue was shaping the destiny of
parties and of the nation. It was an issue that politicians
dodged and candidates evaded, that all parties avoided, that
publicists feared, and that presidents and congressmen tried to
hide under the tenuous fabric of their compromises promises. But
it was an issue that persisted in keeping alive and that would
not down, for it was an issue between right and wrong. Three
times the great Clay maneuvered to outflank his opponents over
the smoldering fires of the slaver issue, but he died before the
repeal of the Missouri Compromise gave the death-blow to his
loosely gathered coalition. Webster, too, and Calhoun, the other
members of that brilliant trinity which represented the genius of
Constitutional Unionism, of States Rights, and of Conciliation,
passed away before the issue was squarely faced by a new party
organized for the purpose of opposing the further expansion of
slavery.

This new organization, the Republican party, rapidly assumed form
and solidarity. It was composed of Northern Whigs, of
anti-slavery Democrats, and of members of several minor groups,
such as the Know-Nothing or American party, the Liberty party,
and included as well some of the despised Abolitionists. The vote
for Fremont, its first presidential candidate, in 1866, showed it
to be a sectional party, confined to the North. But the definite
recognition of slavery as an issue by an opposition party had a
profound effect upon the Democrats. Their Southern wing now
promptly assumed an uncompromising attitude, which, in 1860,
split the party into factions. The Southern wing named
Breckinridge; the Northern wing named Stephen A. Douglas; while
many Democrats as well as Whigs took refuge in a third party,
calling itself the Constitutional Union, which named John Bell.
This division cost the Democrats the election, for, under the
unique and inspiring leadership of Abraham Lincoln, the
Republicans rallied the anti-slavery forces of the North and won.

Slavery not only racked the parties and caused new alignments; it
racked and split the Union. It is one of the remarkable phenomena
of our political history that the Civil War did not destroy the
Democratic party, though the Southern chieftains of that party
utterly lost their cause. The reason is that the party never was
as purely a Southern as the Republican was a Northern party.
Moreover, the arrogance and blunders of the Republican leaders
during the days of Reconstruction helped to keep it alive. A
baneful political heritage has been handed down to us from the
Civil War--the solid South. It overturns the national balance of
parties, perpetuates a pernicious sectionalism, and deprives the
South of that bipartizan rivalry which keeps open the currents of
political life.

Since the Civil War the struggle between the two dominant parties
has been largely a struggle between the Ins and the Outs. The
issues that have divided them have been more apparent than real.
The tariff, the civil service, the trusts, and the long list of
other "issues" do not denote fundamental differences, but only
variations of degree. Never in any election during this long
interval has there been definitely at stake a great national
principle, save for the currency issue of 1896 and the colonial
question following the War with Spain. The revolt of the
Progressives in 1912 had a character of its own; but neither of
the old parties squarely joined issue with the Progressives in
the contest which followed. The presidential campaign of 1916
afforded an opportunity to place on trial before the people a
great cause, for there undoubtedly existed then in the country
two great and opposing sides of public opinion--one for and the
other against war with Germany. Here again, however, the issue
was not joined but was adroitly evaded by both the candidates.

None the less there has been a difference between the two great
parties. The Republican party has been avowedly nationalistic,
imperialistic, and in favor of a vigorous constructive foreign
policy. The Democratic party has generally accepted the lukewarm
international policy of Jefferson and the exaltation of the
locality and the plain individual as championed by Jackson. Thus,
though in a somewhat intangible and variable form, the doctrinal
distinctions between Hamilton and Jefferson have survived.

In the emergence of new issues, new parties are born. But it is
one of the singular characteristics of the American party system
that third parties are abortive. Their adherents serve mainly as
evangelists, crying their social and economic gospel in the
political wilderness. If the issues are vital, they are gradually
absorbed by the older parties.

Before the Civil War several sporadic parties were formed. The
most unique was the Anti-Masonic party. It flourished on the
hysteria caused by the abduction of William Morgan of Batavia, in
western New York, in 1826. Morgan had written a book purporting
to lay bare the secrets of Freemasonry. His mysterious
disappearance was laid at the doors of leading Freemasons; and it
was alleged that members of this order placed their secret
obligations above their duties as citizens and were hence unfit
for public office. The movement became impressive in
Pennsylvania, Vermont, Massachusetts, Ohio, and New York. It
served to introduce Seward and Fillmore into politics. Even a
national party was organized, and William Wirt, of Maryland, a
distinguished lawyer, was nominated for President. He received,
however, only the electoral votes of Vermont. The excitement soon
cooled, and the party disappeared.

The American or Know-Nothing party had for its slogan "America
for Americans," and was a considerable factor in certain
localities, especially in New York and the Middle States, from
1853 to 1856. The Free Soil party, espousing the cause of slavery
restriction, named Martin Van Buren as its presidential candidate
and polled enough votes in the election of 1848 to defeat Cass,
the Democratic candidate. It did not survive the election of
1852, but its essential principle was adopted by the Republican
party.

Since the Civil War, the currency question has twice given life
to third-party movements. The Greenbacks of 1876-1884 and the
Populists of the 90's were both of the West. Both carried on for
a few years a vigorous crusade, and both were absorbed by the
older parties as the currency question assumed concrete form and
became g commanding political issue. Since 1872, the
Prohibitionists have named national tickets. Their question,
which was always dodged by the dominant parties, is now rapidly
nearing a solution.

The one apparently unreconcilable element in our political life
is the socialistic or labor party. Never of great importance in
any national election, the various labor parties have been of
considerable influence in local politics. Because of its
magnitude, the labor vote has always been courted by Democrats
and Republicans with equal ardor but with varying success.



CHAPTER II. THE RISE OF THE MACHINE

Ideas or principles alone, however eloquently and insistently
proclaimed, will not make a party. There must be organization.
Thus we have two distinct practical phases of American party
politics: one regards the party as an agency of the electorate, a
necessary organ of democracy; the other, the party as an
organization, an army determined to achieve certain conquests.
Every party has, therefore, two aspects, each attracting a
different kind of person: one kind allured by the principles
espoused; the other, by the opportunities of place and personal
gain in the organization. The one kind typifies the body of
voters; the other the dominant minority of the party.

When one speaks, then, of a party in America, he embraces in that
term: first, the tenets or platform for which the party assumes
to stand (i.e., principles that may have been wrought out of
experience, may have been created by public opinion, or were
perhaps merely made out of hand by manipulators); secondly, the
voters who profess attachment to these principles; and thirdly,
the political expert, the politician with his organization or
machine. Between the expert and the great following are many
gradations of party activity, from the occasional volunteer to
the chieftain who devotes all his time to "politics."

It was discovered very early in American experience that without
organization issues would disintegrate and principles remain but
scintillating axioms. Thus necessity enlisted executive talent
and produced the politician, who, having once achieved an
organization, remained at his post to keep it intact between
elections and used it for purposes not always prompted by the
public welfare.

In colonial days, when the struggle began between Crown and
Colonist, the colonial patriots formed clubs to designate their
candidates for public office. In Massachusetts these clubs were
known as "caucuses," a word whose derivation is unknown, but
which has now become fixed in our political vocabulary. These
early caucuses in Boston have been described as follows: "Mr.
Samuel Adams' father and twenty others, one or two from the north
end of the town, where all the ship business is carried on, used
to meet, make a caucus, and lay their plans for introducing
certain persons into places of trust and power. When they had
settled it, they separated, and used each their particular
influence within his own circle. He and his friends would furnish
themselves with ballots, including the names of the parties fixed
upon, which they distributed on the day of election. By acting in
concert together with a careful and extensive distribution of
ballots they generally carried the elections to their own mind."

As the revolutionary propaganda increased in momentum, caucuses
assumed a more open character. They were a sort of informal town
meeting, where neighbors met and agreed on candidates and the
means of electing them. After the adoption of the Constitution,
the same methods were continued, though modified to suit the
needs of the new party alignments. In this informal manner, local
and even congressional candidates were named.

Washington was the unanimous choice of the nation In the third
presidential election, John Adams was the tacitly accepted
candidate of the Federalists and Jefferson of the
Democratic-Republicans, and no formal nominations seem to have
been made. But from 1800 to 1824 the presidential candidates were
designated by members of Congress in caucus. It was by this means
that the Virginia Dynasty fastened itself upon the country. The
congressional caucus, which was one of the most arrogant and
compact political machines that our politics has produced,
discredited itself by nominating William H. Crawford (1824), a
machine politician, whom the public never believed to be of
presidential caliber. In the bitter fight that placed John Quincy
Adams in the White House and made Jackson the eternal enemy of
Clay, the congressional caucus met its doom. For several years,
presidential candidates were nominated by various informal
methods. In 1828 a number of state legislatures formally
nominated Jackson. In several States the party members of the
legislatures in caucus nominated presidential candidates. DeWitt
Clinton was so designated by the New York legislature in 1812 and
Henry Clay by the Kentucky legislature in 1822. Great mass
meetings, often garnished with barbecues, were held in many parts
of the country in 1824 for indorsing the informal nominations of
the various candidates.

But none of these methods served the purpose. The President was a
national officer, backed by a national party, and chosen by a
national electorate. A national system of nominating the
presidential candidates was demanded. On September 26, 1881, 113
delegates of the Anti-Masonic party, representing thirteen
States, met in a national convention in Baltimore. This was the
first national nominating convention held in America.

In February, 1831, the Whig members of the Maryland legislature
issued a call for a national Whig convention. This was held in
Baltimore the following December. Eighteen States were
represented by delegates, each according to the number Of
presidential electoral votes it cast. Clay was named for
President. The first national Democratic convention met in
Baltimore on May 21, 1882, and nominated Jackson.

Since that time, presidential candidates have been named in
national conventions. There have been surprisingly few changes in
procedure since the first convention. It opened with a temporary
organization, examined the credentials of delegates, and
appointed a committee on permanent organization, which reported a
roster of permanent officers. It appointed a committee on
platform--then called an address to the people; it listened to
eulogistic nominating speeches, balloted for candidates, and
selected a committee to notify the nominees of their designation.
This is practically the order of procedure today. The national
convention is at once the supreme court and the supreme
legislature of the national party. It makes its own rules,
designates its committees, formulates their procedure and defines
their power, writes the platform, and appoints the national
executive committee.

Two rules that have played a significant part in these
conventions deserve special mention. The first Democratic
convention, in order to insure the nomination of Van Buren for
Vice-President--the nomination of Jackson for President was
uncontested--adopted the rule that "two-thirds of the whole
number of the votes in the convention shall be necessary to
constitute a choice." This "two-thirds" rule, so undemocratic in
its nature, remains the practice of the Democratic party today.
The Whigs and Republicans always adhered to the majority rule.
The early Democratic conventions also adopted the practice of
allowing the majority of the delegates from any State to cast the
vote of the entire delegation from that State, a rule which is
still adhered to by the Democrats. But the Republicans have since
1876 adhered to the policy of allowing each individual delegate
to cast his vote as he chooses.

The convention was by no means novel when accepted as a national
organ for a national party. As early as 1789 an informal
convention was held in the Philadelphia State House for
nominating Federalist candidates for the legislature. The
practice spread to many Pennsylvania counties and to other
States, and soon this informality of self-appointed delegates
gave way to delegates appointed according to accepted rules. When
the legislative caucus as a means for nominating state officers
fell into disrepute, state nominating conventions took its place.
In 1812 one of the earliest movements for a state convention was
started by Tammany Hall, because it feared that the legislative
caucus would nominate DeWitt Clinton, its bitterest foe. The
caucus, however, did not name Clinton, and the convention was not
assembled. The first state nominating convention was held in
Utica, New York, in 1824 by that faction of the Democratic party
calling itself the People's party. The custom soon spread to
every State, so that by 1835 it was firmly established. County
and city conventions also took the place of the caucus for naming
local candidates.

But nominations are only the beginning of the contest, and
obviously caucuses and conventions cannot conduct campaigns. So
from the beginning these nominating bodies appointed campaign
committees. With the increase in population came the increased
complexity of the committee system. By 1830 many of the States
had perfected a series of state, district, and county committees.

There remained the necessity of knitting these committees into a
national unity. The national convention which nominated Clay in
1831 appointed a "Central State Corresponding Committee" in each
State where none existed, and it recommended "to the several
States to organize subordinate corresponding committees in each
county and town." This was the beginning of what soon was to
evolve into a complete national hierarchy of committees. In 1848
the Democratic convention appointed a permanent national
committee, composed of one member from each State. This committee
was given the power to call the next national convention, and
from the start became the national executive body of the party.

It is a common notion that the politician and his machine are of
comparatively recent origin. But the American politician arose
contemporaneously with the party, and with such singular
fecundity of ways and means that it is doubtful if his modern
successors could teach him anything. McMaster declares: "A very
little study of long-forgotten politics will suffice to show that
in filibustering and gerrymandering, in stealing governorships
and legislatures, in using force at the polls, in colonizing and
in distributing patronage to whom patronage is due, in all the
frauds and tricks that go to make up the worst form of practical
politics, the men who founded our state and national governments
were always our equals, and often our masters." And this at a
time when only propertied persons could vote in any of the States
and when only professed Christians could either vote or hold
office in two of them!

While Washington was President, Tammany Hall, the first municipal
machine, began its career; and presently George Clinton, Governor
of New York, and his nephew, DeWitt Clinton, were busy organizing
the first state machine. The Clintons achieved their purpose
through the agency of a Council of Appointment, prescribed by the
first Constitution of the State, consisting of the Governor and
four senators chosen by the legislature. This council had the
appointment of nearly all the civil officers of the State from
Secretary of State to justices of the peace and auctioneers,
making a total of 8287 military and 6663 civil offices. As the
emoluments of some of these offices were relatively high, the
disposal of such patronage was a plum-tree for the politician.
The Clintons had been Anti-Federalists and had opposed the
adoption of the Constitution. In 1801 DeWitt Clinton became a
member of the Council of Appointment and soon dictated its
action. The head of every Federalist office-holder fell.
Sheriffs, county clerks, surrogates, recorders, justices by the
dozen, auctioneers by the score, were proscribed for the benefit
of the Clintons. De Witt was sent to the United States Senate in
1802, and at the age of thirty-three he found himself on the
highroad to political eminence. But he resigned almost at once to
become Mayor of New York City, a position he occupied for about
ten years, years filled with the most venomous fights between
Burrites and Bucktails. Clinton organized a compact machine in
the city. A biased contemporary description of this machine has
come down to us. "You [Clinton] are encircled by a mercenary
band, who, while they offer adulation to your system of error,
are ready at the first favorable moment to forsake and desert
you. A portion of them are needy young men, who without maturely
investigating the consequence, have sacrificed principle to
self-aggrandizement. Others are mere parasites, that well know
the tenure on which they hold their offices, and will ever pay
implicit obedience to those who administer to their wants. Many
of your followers are among the most profligate of the community.
They are the bane of social and domestic happiness, senile and
dependent panderers."

In 1812 Clinton became a candidate for President and polled 89
electoral votes against Madison's 128. Subsequently he became
Governor of New York on the Erie Canal issue; but his political
cunning seems to have forsaken him; and his perennial quarrels
with every other faction in his State made him the object of a
constant fire of vituperation. He had, however, taught all his
enemies ''the value of spoils, and he adhered to the end to the
political action he early advised a friend to adopt: "In a
political warfare, the defensive side will eventually lose. The
meekness of Quakerism will do in religion but not in politics. I
repeat it, everything will answer to energy and decision."

Martin Van Buren was an early disciple of Clinton. Though he
broke with his political chief in 1813, he had remained long
enough in the Clinton school to learn every trick; and he
possessed such native talent for intrigue, so smooth a manner,
and such a wonderful memory for names, that he soon found himself
at the head of a much more perfect and far-reaching machine than
Clinton had ever dreamed of. The Empire State has never produced
the equal of Van Buren as a manipulator of legislatures. No
modern politician would wish to face publicity if he resorted to
the petty tricks that Van Buren used in legislative politics. And
when, in 1891, he was elected to the Senate of the United States,
he became one of the organizers of the first national machine.

The state machine of Van Buren was long known as the "Albany
Regency." It included several very able politicians: William L.
Marcy, who became United States Senator in 1831; Silas Wright,
elected Senator in 1833; John A. Dix, who became Senator in 1845;
Benjamin F. Butler, who was United States Attorney-General under
President Van Buren, besides a score or more of prominent state
officials. It had an influential organ in the Albany Argus,
lieutenants in every county, and captains in every town. Its
confidential agents kept the leaders constantly informed of the
political situation in every locality; and its discipline made
the wish of Van Buren and his colleagues a command. Federal and
local patronage and a sagacious distribution of state contracts
sustained this combination. When the practice of nominating by
conventions began, the Regency at once discerned the strategic
value of controlling delegates, and, until the break in the
Democratic party in 1848, it literally reigned in the State.

With the disintegration of the Federalist party came the loss of
concentrated power by the colonial families of New England and
New York. The old aristocracy of the South was more fortunate in
the maintenance of its power. Jefferson's party was not only well
disciplined; it gave its confidence to a people still accustomed
to class rule and in turn was supported by them. In a strict
sense the Virginia Dynasty was not a machine like Van Buren's
Albany Regency. It was the effect of the concentrated influence
of men of great ability rather than a definite organization. The
congressional caucus was the instrument through which their
influence was made practical. In 1816, however, a considerable
movement was started to end the Virginia monopoly. It spread to
the Jeffersonians of the North. William H. Crawford, of Georgia,
and Daniel Tompkins, of New York, came forward as competitors
with Monroe for the caucus nomination. The knowledge of this
intrigue fostered the rising revolt against the caucus.
Twenty-two Republicans, many of whom were known to be opposed to
the caucus system, absented themselves. Monroe was nominated by
the narrow margin of eleven votes over Crawford. By the time
Monroe had served his second term the discrediting of the caucus
was made complete by the nomination of Crawford by a thinly
attended gathering of his adherents, who presumed to act for the
party. The Virginia Dynasty had no further favorites to foster,
and a new political force swept into power behind the dominating
personality of Andrew Jackson.

The new Democracy, however, did not remove the aristocratic power
of the slaveholder; and from Jackson's day to Buchanan's this
became an increasing force in the party councils. The slavery
question illustrates how a compact group of capable and
determined men, dominated by an economic motive, can exercise for
years in the political arena a preponderating influence, even
though they represent an actual minority of the nation. This
untoward condition was made possible by the political sagacity
and persistence of the party managers and by the unwillingness of
a large portion of the people to bring the real issue to a head.

Before the Civil War, then, party organization had become a fixed
and necessary incident in American politics. The war changed the
face of our national affairs. The changes wrought multiplied the
opportunities of the professional politician, and in these
opportunities, as well as in the transfused energies and ideals
of the people, we must seek the causes for those perversions of
party and party machinery which have characterized our modern
epoch.



CHAPTER III. THE TIDE OF MATERIALISM

The Civil War, which shocked the country into a new national
consciousness and rearranged the elements of its economic life,
also brought about a new era in political activity and
management. The United States after Appomattox was a very
different country from the United States before Sumter was fired
upon. The war was a continental upheaval, like the Appalachian
uplift in our geological history, producing sharp and profound
readjustments.

Despite the fact that in 1864 Lincoln had been elected on a Union
ticket supported by War Democrats, the Republicans claimed the
triumphs of the war as their own. They emerged from the struggle
with the enormous prestige of a party triumphant and with
"Saviors of the Union" inscribed on their banners.

The death of their wise and great leader opened the door to a
violent partizan orgy. President Andrew Johnson could not check
the fury of the radical reconstructionists; and a new political
era began in a riot of dogmatic and insolent dictatorship, which
was intensified by the mob of carpetbaggers, scalawags, and
freedmen in the South, and not abated by the lawless promptings
of the Ku-Klux to regain patrician leadership in the home of
secession nor by the baneful resentment of the North. The soldier
was made a political asset. For a generation the "bloody shirt"
was waved before the eyes of the Northern voter; and the evils,
both grotesque and gruesome, of an unnatural reconstruction are
not yet forgotten in the South.

A second opportunity of the politician was found in the rapid
economic expansion that followed the war. The feeling of security
in the North caused by the success of the Union arms buoyed an
unbounded optimism which made it easy to enlist capital in new
enterprises, and the protective tariff and liberal banking law
stimulated industry. Exports of raw material and food products
stimulated mining, grazing, and farming. European capital sought
investments in American railroads, mines, and industrial under-
takings. In the decade following the war the output of pig iron
doubled, that of coal multiplied by five, and that of steel by
one hundred. Superior iron and copper, Pennsylvania coal and oil,
Nevada and California gold and silver, all yielded their enormous
values to this new call of enterprise. Inventions and
manufactures of all kinds flourished. During 1850-60
manufacturing establishments had increased by fourteen per cent.
During 1860-70 they increased seventy-nine per cent.

The Homestead Act of May 20, 1862, opened vast areas of public
lands to a new immigration. The flow of population was westward,
and the West called for communication with the East. The Union
Pacific and Central Pacific railways, the pioneer
transcontinental lines, fostered on generous grants of land, were
the tokens of the new transportation movement. Railroads were
pushing forward everywhere with unheard-of rapidity. Short lines
were being merged into far-reaching systems. In the early
seventies the Pennsylvania system was organized and the
Vanderbilts acquired control of lines as far west as Chicago.
Soon the Baltimore and Ohio system extended its empire of trade
to the Mississippi. Half a dozen ambitious trans-Mississippi
systems, connecting with four new transcontinental projects, were
put into operation.

Prosperity is always the opportunity of the politician. What is
of greatest significance to the student of politics is that
prosperity at this time was organized on a new basis. Before the
war business had been conducted largely by individuals or
partnerships. The unit was small; the amount of capital needed
was limited. But now the unit was expanding so rapidly, the need
for capital was so lavish, the empire of trade so extensive, that
a new mechanism of ownership was necessary. This device, of
course, was the corporation. It had, indeed, existed as a trading
unit for many years. But the corporation before 1860 was
comparatively small and was generally based upon charters granted
by special act of the legislature.

No other event has had so practical a bearing on our politics and
our economic and social life as the advent of the corporate
device for owning and manipulating private business. For it links
the omnipotence of the State to the limitations of private
ownership; it thrusts the interests of private business into
every legislature that grants charters or passes regulating acts;
it diminishes, on the other hand, that stimulus to honesty and
correct dealing which a private individual discerns to be his
greatest asset in trade, for it replaces individual
responsibility with group responsibility and scatters ownership
among so large a number of persons that sinister manipulation is
possible.

But if the private corporation, through its interest in broad
charter privileges and liberal corporation laws and its devotion
to the tariff and to conservative financial policies, found it
convenient to do business with the politician and his
organization, the quasi-public corporations, especially the steam
railroads and street railways, found it almost essential to their
existence. They received not only their franchises but frequently
large bonuses from the public treasury. The Pacific roads alone
were endowed with an empire of 145,000,000 acres of public land.
States, counties, and cities freely loaned their credit and gave
ample charters to new railway lines which were to stimulate
prosperity.

City councils, legislatures, mayors, governors, Congress, and
presidents were drawn into the maelstrom of commercialism. It is
not surprising that side by side with the new business
organization there grew up a new political organization, and that
the new business magnate was accompanied by a new political
magnate. The party machine and the party boss were the natural
product of the time, which was a time of gain and greed. It was a
sordid reaction, indeed, from the high principles that sought
victory on the field of battle and that found their noblest
embodiment in the character of Abraham Lincoln.

The dominant and domineering party chose the leading soldier of
the North as its candidate for President. General Grant, elected
as a popular idol because of his military genius, possessed
neither the experience nor the skill to countermove the
machinations of designing politicians and their business allies.
On the other hand, he soon displayed an admiration for business
success that placed him at once in accord with the spirit of the
hour. He exalted men who could make money rather than men who
could command ideas. He chose Alexander T. Stewart, the New York
merchant prince, one of the three richest men of his day, for
Secretary of the Treasury. The law, however, forbade the
appointment to this office of any one who should "directly or
indirectly be concerned or interested in carrying on the business
of trade or commerce," and Stewart was disqualified. Adolph E.
Borie of Philadelphia, whose qualifications were the possession
of great wealth and the friendship of the President, was named
Secretary of the Navy. Another personal friend, John A. Rawlins,
was named Secretary of War. A third friend, Elihu B. Washburne of
Illinois, was made Secretary of State. Washburne soon resigned,
and Hamilton Fish of New York was appointed in his place. Fish,
together with General Jacob D. Cox of Ohio, Secretary of the
Interior, and Judge E. Rockwood Hoar of Massachusetts,
Attorney-General, formed a strong triumvirate of ability and
character in the Cabinet. But, while Grant displayed pleasure in
the companionship of these eminent men, they never possessed his
complete confidence. When the machinations for place and favor
began, Hoar and Cox were in the way. Hoar had offended the Senate
in his recommendations for federal circuit judges (the circuit
court was then newly established), and when the President named
him for Justice of the Supreme Court, Hoar was rejected. Senator
Cameron, one of the chief spoils politicians of the time, told
Hoar frankly why: "What could you expect for a man who had
snubbed seventy Senators!" A few months later (June, 1870), the
President bluntly asked for Hoar's resignation, a sacrifice to
the gods of the Senate, to purchase their favor for the Santo
Domingo treaty.

Cox resigned in the autumn. As Secretary of the Interior he had
charge of the Patent Office, Census Bureau, and Indian Service,
all of them requiring many appointments. He had attempted to
introduce a sort of civil service examination for applicants and
had vehemently protested against political assessments levied on
clerks in his department. He especially offended Senators Cameron
and Chandler, party chieftains who had the ear of the President.
General Cox stated the matter plainly: "My views of the necessity
of reform in the civil service had brought me more or less into
collision with the plans of our active political managers and my
sense of duty has obliged me to oppose some of their methods of
action." These instances reveal how the party chieftains insisted
inexorably upon their demands. To them the public service was
principally a means to satisfy party ends, and the chief duty of
the President and his Cabinet was to satisfy the claims of party
necessity. General Cox said that distributing offices occupied
"the larger part of the time of the President and all his
Cabinet." General Garfield wrote (1877): "One-third of the
working hours of Senators and Representatives is hardly
sufficient to meet the demands made upon them in reference to
appointments to office."

By the side of the partizan motives stalked the desire for gain.
There were those to whom parties meant but the opportunity for
sudden wealth. The President's admiration for commercial success
and his inability to read the motives of sycophants multiplied
their opportunities, and in the eight years of his administration
there was consummated the baneful union of business and politics.

During the second Grant campaign (1872), when Horace Greeley was
making his astounding run for President, the New York Sun hinted
at gross and wholesale briberies of Congressmen by Oakes Ames and
his associates who had built the Union Pacific Railroad, an
enterprise which the United States had generously aided with
loans and gifts.

Three committees of Congress, two in the House and one in the
Senate (the Poland Committee, the Wilson Committee, and the
Senate Committee), subsequently investigated the charges. Their
investigations disclosed the fact that Ames, then a member of the
House of Representatives, the principal stockholder in the Union
Pacific, and the soul of the enterprise, had organized, under an
existing Pennsylvania charter, a construction company called the
Credit Mobilier, whose shares were issued to Ames and his
associates. To the Credit Mobilier were issued the bonds and
stock of the Union Pacific, which had been paid for "at not more
than thirty cents on the dollar in road-making."* As the United
States, in addition to princely gifts of land, had in effect
guaranteed the cost of construction by authorizing the issue of
Government bonds, dollar for dollar and side by side with the
bonds of the road, the motive of the magnificent shuffle, which
gave the road into the hands of a construction company, was
clear. Now it was alleged that stock of the Credit Mobilier,
paying dividends of three hundred and forty per cent, had been
distributed by Ames among many of his fellow-Congressmen, in
order to forestall a threatened investigation. It was disclosed
that some of the members had refused point blank to have anything
to do with the stock; others had refused after deliberation;
others had purchased some of it outright; others, alas!, had
"purchased" it, to be paid for out of its own dividends.

* Testimony before the Wilson Committee.


The majority of the members involved in the nasty affair were
absolved by the Poland Committee from "any corrupt motive or
purpose." But Oakes Ames of Massachusetts and James Brooks of New
York were recommended for expulsion from the House and Patterson
of New Hampshire from the Senate. The House, however, was content
with censuring Ames and Brooks, and the Senate permitted
Patterson's term to expire, since only five days of it remained.
Whatever may have been the opinion of Congress, and whatever a
careful reading of the testimony discloses to an impartial mind
at this remote day, upon the voters of that time the revelations
came as a shock. Some of the most trusted Congressmen were drawn
into the miasma of suspicion, among them Garfield; Dawes;
Scofield; Wilson, the newly elected Vice-President; Colfax, the
outgoing Vice-President. Colfax had been a popular idol, with the
Presidency in his vision; now bowed and disgraced, he left the
national capital never to return with a public commission.

In 1874 came the disclosures of the Whiskey Ring. They involved
United States Internal Revenue officers and distillers in the
revenue district of St. Louis and a number of officials at
Washington. Benjamin H. Bristow, on becoming Secretary of the
Treasury in June of that year, immediately scented corruption. He
discovered that during 1871-74 only about one-third of the
whiskey shipped from St. Louis had paid the tax and that the
Government had been defrauded of nearly $3,000,000. "If a
distiller was honest," says James Ford Rhodes, the eminent
historian, "he was entrapped into some technical violation of the
law by the officials, who by virtue of their authority seized his
distillery, giving him the choice of bankruptcy or a partnership
in their operations; and generally he succumbed."

McDonald, the supervisor of the St. Louis revenue district, was
the leader of the Whiskey Ring. He lavished gifts upon President
Grant, who, with an amazing indifference and innocence, accepted
such favors from all kinds of sources. Orville E. Babcock, the
President's private secretary, who possessed the complete
confidence of the guileless general, was soon enmeshed in the net
of investigation. Grant at first declared, "If Babcock is guilty,
there is no man who wants him so much proven guilty as I do, for
it is the greatest piece of traitorism to me that a man could
possibly practice." When Babcock was indicted, however, for
complicity to defraud the Government, the President did not
hesitate to say on oath that he had never seen anything in
Babcock's behavior which indicated that he was in any way
interested in the Whiskey Ring and that he had always had "great
confidence in his integrity and efficiency." In other ways the
President displayed his eagerness to defend his private
secretary. The jury acquitted Babcock, but the public did not. He
was compelled to resign under pressure of public condemnation,
and was afterwards indicted for conspiracy to rob a safe of
documents of an incriminating character. But Grant seems never to
have lost faith in him. Three of the men sent to prison for their
complicity in the whiskey fraud were pardoned after six months.
McDonald, the chieftain of the gang, served but one year of his
term.

The exposure of the Whiskey Ring was followed by an even more
startling humiliation. The House Committee on Expenditures in the
War Department recommended that General William W. Belknap,
Secretary of War, be impeached for "high crimes and misdemeanors
while in office," and the House unanimously adopted the
recommendation. The evidence upon which the committee based its
drastic recommendation disclosed the most sordid division of
spoils between the Secretary and his wife and two rascals who
held in succession the valuable post of trader at Fort Sill in
the Indian Territory.

The committee's report was read about three o'clock in the
afternoon of March 2, 1876. In the forenoon of the same day
Belknap had sent his resignation to the President, who had
accepted it immediately. The President and Belknap were personal
friends. But the certainty of Belknap's perfidy was not removed
by the attitude of the President, nor by the vote of the Senate
on the article of impeachment--37 guilty, 25 not guilty-for the
evidence was too convincing. The public knew by this time Grant's
childlike failing in sticking to his friends; and 93 of the 25
Senators who voted not guilty had publicly declared they did so,
not because they believed him innocent, but because they believed
they had no jurisdiction over an official who had resigned.

There were many minor indications of the harvest which gross
materialism was reaping in the political field. State and city
governments were surrendered to political brigands. In 1871 the
Governor of Nebraska was removed for embezzlement. Kansas was
startled by revelations of brazen bribery in her senatorial
elections (1872-1873). General Schenck, representing the United
States at the Court of St. James, humiliated his country by
dabbling in a fraudulent mining scheme.

In a speech before the Senate, then trying General Belknap,
Senator George F. Hoar, on May 6, 1876, summed up the greater
abominations:

"My own public life has been a very brief and insignificant one,
extending little beyond the duration of a single term of
senatorial office. But in that brief period I have seen five
judges of a high court of the United States driven from office by
threats of impeachment for corruption or maladministration. I
have heard the taunt from friendliest lips, that when the United
States presented herself in the East to take part with the
civilized world in generous competition in the arts of life, the
only products of her institutions in which she surpassed all
others beyond question was her corruption. I have seen in the
State in the Union foremost in power and wealth four judges of
her courts impeached for corruption, and the political
administration of her chief city become a disgrace and a byword
throughout the world. I have seen the chairman of the Committee
on Military Affairs in the House rise in his place and demand the
expulsion of four of his associates for making sale of their
official privilege of selecting the youths to be educated at our
great military schools. When the greatest railroad of the world,
binding together the continent and uniting the two great seas
which wash our shores, was finished, I have seen our national
triumph and exaltation turned to bitterness and shame by the
unanimous reports of three committees of Congress--two in the
House and one here--that every step of that mighty enterprise had
been taken in fraud. I have heard in highest places the shameless
doctrine avowed by men grown old in public office that the true
way by which power should be gained in the Republic is to bribe
the people with the offices created for their service, and the
true end for which it should be used when gained is the promotion
of selfish ambition and the gratification of personal revenge. I
have heard that suspicions haunt the footsteps of the trusted
companions of the President."

These startling facts did not shatter the prestige of the
Republicans, the "Saviors of the Union," nor humble their
leaders. One of them, Senator Foraker, says*: "The campaign
(1876) on the part of the Democrats gave emphasis to the reform
idea and exploited Tilden as the great reform governor of New
York and the best fitted man in the country to bring about
reforms in the Government of the United States. No reforms were
needed: but a fact like that never interfered with a reform
campaign." The orthodoxy of the politician remained unshaken.
Foraker's reasons were the creed of thousands: "The Republican
party had prosecuted the war successfully; had reconstructed the
States; had rehabilitated our finances, and brought on specie
redemption." The memoirs of politicians and statesmen of this
period, such as Cullom, Foraker, Platt, even Hoar, are imbued
with an inflexible faith in the party and colored by the
conviction that it is a function of Government to aid business.
Platt, for instance, alluding to Blaine's attitude as Speaker, in
the seventies, said: "What I liked about him was his frank and
persistent contention that the citizen who best loved his party
and was loyal to it, was loyal to and best loved his country."
And many years afterwards, when a new type of leader appeared
representing a new era of conviction, Platt was deeply concerned.
His famous letter to Roosevelt, when the Rough Rider was being
mentioned for Governor of New York (1899), shows the reluctance
of the old man to see the signs of the times: "The thing that
really did bother me was this: I had heard from a great many
sources that you were a little loose on the relations of capital
and labor, on trusts and combinations, and indeed on the numerous
questions which have recently arisen in politics affecting the
security of earnings and the right of a man to run his own
business in his own way, with due respect of course to the Ten
Commandments and the Penal Code."

* "Notes from a Busy Life", vol. I., 98.


The leaders of both the great parties firmly and honestly
believed that it was the duty of the Government to aid private
enterprise, and that by stimulating business everybody is helped.
This article of faith, with the doctrine of the sanctity of the
party, was a natural product of the conditions outlined in the
beginning of this chapter--the war and the remarkable economic
expansion following the war. It was the cause of the alliance
between business and politics. It made the machine and the boss
the sinister and ever present shadows of legitimate organization
and leadership.



CHAPTER IV. THE POLITICIAN AND THE CITY

The gigantic national machine that was erected during Grant's
administration would have been ineffectual without local sources
of power. These sources of power were found in the cities, now
thriving on the new-born commerce and industry, increasing
marvelously in numbers and in size, and offering to the political
manipulator opportunities that have rarely been paralleled.*

* Between 1860 and 1890 the number of cities of 8000 or more
inhabitants increased from 141 to 448, standing at 226 in 1870.
In 1865 less than 20% of our people lived in the cities; in 1890,
over 30%; in 1900, 40%; in 1910, 46.3%. By 1890 there were six
cities with more than half a million inhabitants, fifteen with
more than 200,000, and twenty-eight with more than 100,000. In
1910 there were twenty-eight cities with a population over
200,000, fifty cities over 100,000, and ninety-eight over 50,000.
It was no uncommon occurrence for a city to double its population
in a decade. In ten years Birmingham gained 245%, Los Angeles,
211%, Seattle, 194%, Spokane, 183%, Dallas, 116%, Schenectady,
129%.


The governmental framework of the American city is based on the
English system as exemplified in the towns of Colonial America.
Their charters were received from the Crown and their business
was conducted by a mayor and a council composed of aldermen and
councilmen. The mayor was usually appointed; the council elected
by a property-holding electorate. In New England the glorified
town meeting was an important agency of local government.

After the Revolution, mayors as well as councilmen were elected,
and the charters of the towns were granted by the legislature,
not by the executive, of the State. In colonial days charters had
been granted by the King. They had fixed for the city certain
immunities and well-defined spheres of autonomy. But when the
legislatures were given the power to grant charters, they reduced
the charter to the level of a statutory enactment, which could be
amended or repealed by any successive legislature, thereby
opening up a convenient field for political maneuvering. The
courts have, moreover, construed these charters strictly, holding
the cities closely bound to those powers which the legislatures
conferred upon them.

The task of governing the early American town was simple enough.
In 1790 New York, Philadelphia, Boston, Baltimore, and Charleston
were the only towns in the United States of over 8000
inhabitants; all together they numbered scarcely 130,000. Their
populations were homogeneous; their wants were few; and they were
still in that happy childhood when every voter knew nearly every
other voter and when everybody knew his neighbor's business as
well as his own, and perhaps better.

Gradually the towns awoke to their newer needs and demanded
public service--lighting, street cleaning, fire protection,
public education. All these matters, however, could be easily
looked after by the mayor and the council committees. But when
these towns began to spread rapidly into cities, they quickly
outgrew their colonial garments. Yet the legislatures were loath
to cast the old garments aside. One may say that from 1840 to
1901, when the Galveston plan of commission government was
inaugurated, American municipal government was nothing but a
series of contests between a small body of alert citizens
attempting to fix responsibility on public officers and a few
adroit politicians attempting to elude responsibility; both sides
appealing to an electorate which was habitually somnolent but
subject to intermittent awakenings through spasms of
righteousness.

During this epoch no important city remained immune from ruthless
legislative interference. Year after year the legislature shifted
officers and responsibilities at the behest of the boss. "Ripper
bills" were passed, tearing up the entire administrative systems
of important municipalities. The city was made the plaything of
the boss and the machine.

Throughout the constant shifts that our city governments have
undergone one may, however, discern three general plans of
government.

The first was the centering of power in the city council, whether
composed of two chambers--a board of aldermen and a common
council--as in New York, Philadelphia, and Chicago, or of one
council, as in many lesser cities. It soon became apparent that a
large body, whose chief function is legislation, is utterly unfit
to look after administrative details. Such a body, in order to do
business, must act through committees. Responsibility is
scattered. Favoritism is possible in letting contracts, in making
appointments, in depositing city funds, in making public
improvements, in purchasing supplies and real estate, and in a
thousand other ways. So, by controlling the appointment of
committees, a shrewd manipulator could virtually control all the
municipal activities and make himself overlord of the city.

The second plan of government attempted to make the mayor the
controlling force. It reduced the council to a legislative body
and exalted the mayor into a real executive with power to appoint
and to remove heads of departments, thereby making him
responsible for the city administration. Brooklyn under Mayor
Seth Low was an encouraging example of this type of government.
But the type was rarely found in a pure form. The politician
succeeded either in electing a subservient mayor or in curtailing
the mayor's authority by having the heads of departments elected
or appointed by the council or made subject to the approval of
the council. If the council held the key to the city treasury,
the boss reigned, for councilmen from properly gerrymandered
wards could usually be trusted to execute his will.

The third form of government was government by boards. Here it
was attempted to place the administration of various municipal
activities in the hands of independent boards. Thus a board had
charge of the police, another of the fire department, another of
public works, and so on. Often there were a dozen of these boards
and not infrequently over thirty in a single city, as in
Philadelphia. Sometimes these boards were elected by the people;
sometimes they were appointed by the council; sometimes they were
appointed by the mayor; in one or two instances they were
appointed by the Governor. Often their powers were shared with
committees of the council; a committee on police, for instance,
shared with the Board of Police Commissioners the direction of
police affairs. Usually these boards were responsible to no one
but the electorate (and that remotely) and were entirely without
coordination, a mere agglomeration of independent creations
generally with ill-defined powers.

Sometimes the laws provided that not all the members of the
appointive boards should "belong to the same political party" or
"be of the same political opinion in state and national issues."
It was clearly the intention to wipe out the partizan complexion
of such boards. But this device was no stumbling-block to the
boss. Whatever might be the "opinions" on national matters of the
men appointed, they usually had a perfect understanding with the
appointing authorities as to local matters. As late as 1898, a
Democratic mayor of New York (Van Wyck) summarily removed the two
Republican members of the Board of Police Commissioners and
replaced them by Republicans after his own heart. In truth, the
bipartizan board fitted snugly into the dual party regime that
existed in many cities, whereby the county offices were
apportioned to one party, the city offices to the other, and the
spoils to both. It is doubtful if any device was ever more
deceiving and less satisfactory than the bipartizan board.

The reader must not be led to think that any one of these plans
of municipal government prevailed at any one time. They all still
exist, contemporaneously with the newer commission plan and the
city manager plan.

Hand in hand with these experiments in governmental mechanisms
for the growing cities went a rapidly increasing expenditure of
public funds. Streets had to be laid out, paved, and lighted;
sewers extended; firefighting facilities increased; schools
built; parks, boulevards, and playgrounds acquired, and scores of
new activities undertaken by the municipality. All these brought
grist to the politician's mill. So did his control of the police
force and the police courts. And finally, with the city reaching
its eager streets far out into the country, came the necessity
for rapid transportation, which opened up for the municipal
politician a new El Dorado.

Under our laws the right of a public service corporation to
occupy the public streets is based upon a franchise from the
city. Before the days of the referendum the franchise was granted
by the city council, usually as a monopoly, sometimes in
perpetuity; and, until comparatively recent years, the
corporation paid nothing to the city for the rights it acquired.

When we reflect that within a few decades of the discovery of
electric power, every city, large and small, had its street-car
and electric-light service, and that most of these cities,
through their councils, gave away these monopoly rights for long
periods of time, we can imagine the princely aggregate of the
gifts which public service corporations have received at the
hands of our municipal governments, and the nature of the
temptations these corporations were able to spread before the
greedy gaze of those whose gesture would seal the grant.

But it was not only at the granting of the franchise that the
boss and his machine sought for spoils. A public service
corporation, being constantly asked for favors, is a continuing
opportunity for the political manipulator. Public service
corporations could share their patronage with the politician in
exchange for favors. Through their control of many jobs, and
through their influence with banks, they could show a wide
assortment of favors to the politician in return for his
influence; for instance, in the matter of traffic regulations,
permission to tear up the streets, inspection laws, rate
schedules, tax assessments, coroners' reports, or juries.

When the politician went to the voters, he adroitly concealed his
designs under the name of one of the national parties. Voters
were asked to vote for a Republican or a Democrat, not for a
policy of municipal administration or other local policies. The
system of committees, caucuses, conventions, built up in every
city, was linked to the national organization. A citizen of New
York, for instance, was not asked to vote for the Broadway
Franchise, which raised such a scandal in the eighties, but to
vote for aldermen running on a national tariff ticket!

The electorate was somnolent and permitted the politician to have
his way. The multitudes of the city came principally from two
sources, from Europe and from the rural districts of our own
country. Those who came to the city from the country were
prompted by industrial motives; they sought wider opportunities;
they soon became immersed in their tasks and paid little
attention to public questions. The foreign immigrants who
congested our cities were alien to American institutions. They
formed a heterogeneous population to whom a common ideal of
government was unknown and democracy a word without meaning.
These foreigners were easily influenced and easily led. Under the
old naturalization laws, they were herded into the courts just
before election and admitted to citizenship. In New York they
were naturalized under the guidance of wardheelers, not
infrequently at the rate of one a minute! And, before the days of
registration laws, ballots were distributed to them and they were
led to the polls, as charity children are given excursion tickets
and are led to their annual summer's day picnic.

The slipshod methods of naturalization have been revealed since
the new law (1906) has been in force. Tens of thousands of voters
who thought they were citizens found that their papers were only
declarations of intentions, or "first papers." Other tens of
thousands had lost even these papers and could not designate the
courts that had issued them; and other thousands found that the
courts that had naturalized them were without jurisdiction in the
matter.

It was not merely among these newcomers that the boss found his
opportunities for carrying elections. The dense city blocks were
convenient lodging places for "floaters." Just before elections,
the population of the downtown wards in the larger cities
increased surprisingly. The boss fully availed himself of the
psychological and social reactions of the city upon the
individual, knowing instinctively how much more easily men are
corrupted when they are merged in the crowd and have lost their
sense of personal responsibility.

It was in the city, then, that industrial politics found their
natural habitat. We shall now scrutinize more closely some of the
developments which arose out of such an environment.



CHAPTER V. TAMMANY HALL

Before the Revolutionary War numerous societies were organized to
aid the cause of Independence. These were sometimes called "Sons
of Liberty" and not infrequently "Sons of St. Tammany," after an
Indian brave whom tradition had shrouded in virtue. The name was
probably adopted to burlesque the royalist societies named after
St. George, St. David, or St. Andrew. After the war these
societies vanished. But, in New York City, William Mooney, an
upholsterer, reorganized the local society as "Tammany Society or
Columbian Order," devoted ostensibly to goodfellowship and
charity. Its officers bore Indian titles and its ceremonies were
more or less borrowed from the red man, not merely because of
their unique and picturesque character, but to emphasize the
truly American and anti-British convictions of its members. The
society attracted that element of the town's population which
delighted in the crude ceremonials and the stimulating potions
that always accompanied them, mostly small shopkeepers and
mechanics. It was among this class that the spirit of discontent
against the power of Federalism was strongest--a spirit that has
often become decisive in our political fortunes.

This was still the day of the "gentleman," of small clothes,
silver shoe-buckles, powdered wigs, and lace ruffles. Only
taxpayers and propertied persons could vote, and public office
was still invested with certain prerogatives and privileges.
Democracy was little more than a name. There was, however, a
distinct division of sentiment, and the drift towards democracy
was accelerated by immigration. The newcomers were largely of the
humble classes, among whom the doctrines of democratic discontent
were welcome.

Tammany soon became partizan. The Federalist members withdrew,
probably influenced by Washington's warning against secret
political societies. By 1798 it was a Republican club meeting in
various taverns, finally selecting Martling's "Long Room" for its
nightly carousals. Soon after this a new constitution was adopted
which adroitly transformed the society into a compact political
machine, every member subscribing to the oath that he would
resist the encroachments of centralized power over the State.

Tradition has it that the transformer of Tammany into the first
compact and effective political machine was Aaron Burr. There is
no direct evidence that he wrote the new constitution. But there
is collateral evidence. Indeed, it would not have been Burrian
had he left any written evidence of his connection with the
organization. For Burr was one of those intriguers who revel in
mystery, who always hide their designs, and never bind themselves
in writing without leaving a dozen loopholes for escape. He was
by this time a prominent figure in American politics. His skill
had been displayed in Albany, both in the passing of legislation
and in out-maneuvering Hamilton and having himself elected United
States Senator against the powerful combination of the
Livingstons and the Schuylers. He was plotting for the Presidency
as the campaign of 1800 approached, and Tammany was to be the
fulcrum to lift him to this conspicuous place.

Under the ostensible leadership of Matthew L. Davis, Burr's chief
lieutenant, every ward of the city was carefully organized, a
polling list was made, scores of new members were pledged to
Tammany, and during the three days of voting (in New York State
until 1840 elections lasted three days), while Hamilton was
making eloquent speeches for the Federalists, Burr was secretly
manipulating the wires of his machine. Burr and Tammany won in
New York City, though Burr failed to win the Presidency. The
political career of this remarkable organization, which has
survived over one hundred and twenty years of stormy history, was
now well launched.

>From that time to the present the history of Tammany Hall is a
tale of victories, followed by occasional disclosures of
corruption and favoritism; of quarrels with governors and
presidents; of party fights between "up-state" and "city"; of
skulking when its sachems were unwelcome in the White House; of
periodical displays of patriotism for cloaking its grosser
crimes; of perennial charities for fastening itself more firmly
on the poorer populace which has always been the source of its
power; of colossal municipal enterprise for profit-sharing; and
of a continuous political efficiency due to sagacious leadership,
a remarkable adaptability to the necessities of the hour, and a
patience that outlasts every "reform."

It early displayed all the traits that have made it successful.
In 1801, for the purpose of carrying city elections, it provided
thirty-nine men with money to purchase houses and lots in one
ward, and seventy men with money for the same purpose in another
ward, thus manufacturing freeholders for polling purposes. In
1806 Benjamin Romaine, a grand sachem, was removed from the
office of city controller by his own party for acquiring land
from the city without paying for it. In 1807 several
superintendents of city institutions were dismissed for frauds.
The inspector of bread, a sachem, resigned because his threat to
extort one-third of the fees from his subordinates had become
public. Several assessment collectors, all prominent in Tammany,
were compelled to reimburse the city for deficits in their
accounts. One of the leading aldermen used his influence to
induce the city to sell land to his brother-in-law at a low
price, and then bade the city buy it back for many times its
value. Mooney, the founder of the society, now superintendent of
the almshouse, was caught in a characteristic fraud. His salary
was $1000 a year, with $500 for family expenses. But it was
discovered that his "expenses" amounted to $4000 a year, and that
he had credited to himself on the books $1000 worth of supplies
and numerous sums for "trifles for Mrs. Mooney."

In September, 1826, the Grand Jury entered an indictment against
Matthew L. Davis and a number of other Tammany men for defrauding
several banks and insurance companies of over $2,000,000. This
created a tremendous sensation. Political influence was at once
set in motion, and only the minor defendants were sent to the
penitentiary.

In 1829 Samuel Swartwout, one of the Tammany leaders, was
appointed Collector of the Port of New York. His downfall came in
1838, and he fled to Europe. His defalcations in the Custom House
were found to be over $1,222,700; and "to Swartwout" became a
useful phrase until Tweed's day. He was succeeded by Jesse Hoyt,
another sachem and notorious politician, against whom several
judgments for default were recorded in the Superior Court, which
were satisfied very soon after his appointment. At this time
another Tammany chieftain, W. M. Price, United States District
Attorney for Southern New York, defaulted for $75,000.

It was in 1851 that the council commonly mown as "The Forty
Thieves" was elected. In it William M. Tweed served his
apprenticeship. Some of the maneuvers of this council and of
other officials were divulged by a Grand Jury in its presentment
of February 23, 1853. The presentment states: "It was clearly
shown that enormous sums of money were spent for the procurement
of railroad grants in the city, and that towards the decision and
procurement of the Eighth Avenue railway grant, a sum so large
that would startle the most credulous was expended; but in
consequence of the voluntary absence of important witnesses, the
Grand Jury was left without direct testimony of the particular
recipients of the different amounts."

These and other exposures brought on a number of amendments to
the city charter, surrounding with greater safeguards the sale or
lease of city property and the letting of contracts; and a reform
council was elected. Immediately upon the heels of this reform
movement followed the shameful regime of Fernando Wood, an able,
crafty, unscrupulous politician, who began by announcing himself
a reformer, but who soon became a boss in the most offensive
sense of that term--not; however, in Tammany Hall, for he was
ousted from that organization after his reelection as mayor in
1856. He immediately organized a machine of his own, Mozart Hall.
The intense struggle between the two machines cost the city a
great sum, for the taxpayers were mulcted to pay the bills.

Through the anxious days of the Civil War, when the minds of
thoughtful citizens were occupied with national issues, the tide
of reform ebbed and flowed. A reform candidate was elected mayor
in 1863, but Tammany returned to power two years later by
securing the election and then the reelection of John T. Hoffman.
Hoffman possessed considerable ability and an attractive
personality. His zeal for high office, however, made him easily
amenable to the manipulators. Tammany made him Governor and
planned to name him for President. Behind his popularity, which
was considerable, and screened by the greater excitements of the
war, reconstruction, and the impeachment of Andrew Johnson,
lurked the Ring, whose exposures and confessions were soon to
amaze everyone.

The chief ringster was William M. Tweed, and his name will always
be associated in the public mind with political bossdom. This is
his immortality. He was a chairmaker by trade, a vulgar good
fellow by nature, a politician by circumstances, a boss by
evolution, and a grafter by choice. He became grand sachem of
Tammany and chairman of the general committee. This committee he
ruled with blunt directness. When he wanted a question carried,
he failed to ask for the negative votes; and soon he was called
"the Boss," a title he never resented, and which usage has since
fixed in our politics. So he ruled Tammany with a high hand; made
nominations arbitrarily; bullied, bought, and traded; became
President of the Board of Supervisors, thus holding the key to
the city's financial policies; and was elected State Senator,
thereby directing the granting of legislative favors to his city
and to his corporations.

In 1868 Tammany carried Hoffman into the Governor's chair, and in
the following year the Democrats carried the State legislature.
Tweed now had a new charter passed which virtually put New York
City into his pocket by placing the finances of the metropolis
entirely in the hands of a Board of Apportionment which he
dominated. Of this Board, the mayor of the city was the chairman,
with the power to appoint the other members. He promptly named
Tweed, Connolly, and P. B. Sweeny. This was the famous Ring. The
mayor was A. Oakey Hall, dubbed "Elegant Oakey" by his pals
because of his fondness for clubs, society, puns, and poems; but
Nast called him "O. K. Haul." Sweeny, commonly known as "Pete,"
was a lawyer of ability, and was generally believed to be the
plotter of the quartet. Nast transformed his middle initial B.
into "Brains." Connolly was just a coarse gangster.

There was some reason for the Ring's faith in its
invulnerability. It controlled Governor and legislature, was
formidable in the national councils of the Democratic party, and
its Governor was widely mentioned for the presidential
nomination. It possessed complete power over the city council,
the mayor, and many of the judges. It was in partnership with
Gould and Fiske of the Erie, then reaping great harvests in Wall
Street, and with street railway and other public service
corporations. Through untold largess it silenced rivalry from
within and criticism from without. And, when suspicion first
raised its voice, it adroitly invited a committee of prominent
and wealthy citizens, headed by John Jacob Astor, to examine the
controller's accounts. After six hours spent in the City Hall
these respectable gentlemen signed an acquitment, saying that
"the affairs of the city under the charge of the controller are
administered in a correct and faithful manner."

Thus intrenched, the Ring levied tribute on every municipal
activity. Everyone who had a charge against the city, either for
work done or materials furnished, was told to add to the amount
of his bill, at first 10%, later 66%, and finally 85%. One man
testified that he was told to raise to $55,000 his claim of
$5000. He got his $5000; the Ring got $50,000. The building of
the Court House, still known as "Tweed's Court House," was
estimated to cost $3,000,000, but it cost many times that sum.
The item "repairing fixtures" amounted to $1,149,874.50, before
the building was completed. Forty chairs and three tables cost
$179,729.60; thermometers cost $7500. G. S. Miller, a carpenter,
received $360,747.61, and a plasterer named Gray, $2,870,464.06
for nine months' "work." The Times dubbed him the "Prince of
Plasterers." "A plasterer who can earn $138,187 in two days
[December 20 and 21] and that in the depths of winter, need not
be poor." Carpets cost $350,000, most of the Brussels and
Axminster going to the New Metropolitan Hotel just opened by
Tweed's son.

The Ring's hold upon the legislature was through bribery, not
through partizan adhesion. Tweed himself confessed that he gave
one man in Albany $600,000 for buying votes to pass his charter;
and Samuel J. Tilden estimated the total cost for this purpose at
over one million dollars. Tweed said he bought five Republican
senators for $40,000 apiece. The vote on the charter was 30 to 2
in the Senate, 116 to 5 in the Assembly. Similar sums were spent
in Albany in securing corporate favors. The Viaduct Railway Bill
is an example. This bill empowered a company, practically owned
by the Ring, to build a railway on or above any street in the
city. It provided that the city should subscribe for $5,000,000
of the stock; and it exempted the company from taxation.
Collateral bills were introduced enabling the company to widen
and grade any streets, the favorite "job" of a Tammany grafter.
Fortunately for the city, exposure came before this monstrous
scheme could be put in motion.

Newspapers in the city were heavily subsidized. Newspapers in
Albany were paid munificently for printing. One of the Albany
papers received $207,900 for one year's work which was worth less
than $10,000. Half a dozen reporters of the leading dailies were
put on the city payroll at from $2000 to $2500 a year for
"services."

The Himalayan size of these swindles and their monumental
effrontery led the New York Sun humorously to suggest the
erection of a statue to the principal Robber Baron, "in
commemoration of his services to the commonwealth." A letter was
sent out asking for funds. There were a great many men in New
York, the Sun thought, who would not be unwilling to refuse a
contribution. But Tweed declined the honor. In its issue of March
14, 1871, the Sun has this headline:

"A GREAT MAN'S MODESTY"

"THE HON. WILLIAM M. TWEED DECLINES THE SUN'S STATUE.
CHARACTERISTIC LETTER FROM THE GREAT NEW YORK PHILANTHROPIST. HE
THINKS THAT VIRTUE SHOULD BE ITS OWN REWARD. THE MOST REMARKABLE
LETTER EVER WRITTEN BY THE NOBLE BENEFACTOR OF THE PEOPLE."

Another kind of memorial to his genius for absorbing the people's
money was awaiting this philanthropic buccaneer. Vulgar
ostentation was the outward badge of these civic burglaries.
Tweed moved into a Fifth Avenue mansion and gave his daughter a
wedding at which she received $100,000 worth of gifts; her
wedding dress was a $5000 creation. At Greenwich he built a
country estate where the stables were framed of choice mahogany.
Sweeny hobnobbed with Jim Fiske of the Erie, the Tweed of Wall
Street, who went about town dressed in loud checks and lived with
his harem in his Opera House on Eighth Avenue.

Thoughtful citizens saw these things going on and believed the
city was being robbed, but they could not prove it. There were
two attacking parties, however, who did not wait for proofs--
Thomas Nast, the brilliant cartoonist of Harper's Weekly, and the
New York Times. The incisive cartoons of Nast appealed to the
imaginations of all classes; even Tweed complained that his
illiterate following could "look at the damn pictures." The
trenchant editorials of Louis L. Jennings in the Times reached a
thoughtful circle of readers. In one of these editorials,
February 24, 1871, before the exposure, he said: "There is
absolutely nothing--nothing in the city--which is beyond the
reach of the insatiable gang who have obtained possession of it.
They can get a grand jury dismissed at any time, and, as we have
seen, the legislature is completely at their disposal."

Finally proof did come and, as is usual in such cases, it came
from the inside. James O'Brien, an ex-sheriff and the leader in a
Democratic "reform movement" calling itself "Young Democracy,"
secured the appointment of one of his friends as clerk in the
controller's office. Transcripts of the accounts were made, and
these O'Brien brought to the Times, which began their
publication, July 8, 1871. The Ring was in consternation. It
offered Gorge Jones, the proprietor of the Times, $5,000,000 for
his silence and sent a well-known banker to Nast with an
invitation to go to Europe "to study art," with $100,000 for
"expenses."

"Do you think I could get $200,000?" innocently asked Nast.

"I believe from what I have heard in the bank that you might get
it."

After some reflection, the cartoonist asked: "Don't you think I
could get $500,000 to make that trip?"

"You can; you can get $500,000 in gold to drop this Ring business
and get out of the country."

"Well, I don't think I'll do it," laughed the artist. "I made up
my mind not long ago to put some of those fellows behind the
bars, and I am going to put them there."

"Only be careful, Mr. Nast, that you do not first put yourself in
a coffin," said the banker as he left.

A public meeting in Cooper Institute, April 6, 1871, was
addressed by William E. Dodge, Henry Ward Beecher, William M.
Evarts, and William F. Havemeyer. They vehemently denounced Tweed
and his gang. Tweed smiled and asked, "Well, what are you going
to do about it?" On the 4th of September, the same year, a second
mass meeting held in the same place answered the question by
appointing a committee of seventy. Tweed, Sweeny, and Hall, now
alarmed by the disclosures in the Times, decided to make Connolly
the scapegoat, and asked the aldermen and supervisors to appoint
a committee to examine his accounts. By the time the committee
appeared for the examination--its purpose had been well
announced--the vouchers for 1869 and 1870 had disappeared. Mayor
Hall then asked for Connolly's resignation. But instead, Connolly
consulted Samuel J. Tilden, who advised him to appoint Andrew H.
Green, a well-known and respected citizen, as his deputy. This
turned the tables on the three other members of the Ring, whose
efforts to oust both Connolly and Green were unavailing. In this
manner the citizens got control of the treasury books, and the
Grand Jury began its inquisitions. Sweeny and Connolly soon fled
to Europe. Sweeny afterwards settled for $400,000 and returned.
Hall's case was presented to a grand jury which proved to be
packed. A new panel was ordered but failed to return an
indictment because of lack of evidence. Hall was subsequently
indicted, but his trial resulted in a disagreement.

Tweed was indicted for felony. He remained at large on bail and
was twice tried in 1873. The first trial resulted in a
disagreement, the second in a conviction. His sentence was a fine
of $12,000 and twelve years' imprisonment. When he arrived at the
penitentiary, he answered the customary questions. "What
occupation?" "Statesman." "What religion?" "None." He served one
year and was then released on a flimsy technicality by the Court
of Appeals. Civil suits were now brought, and, unable to obtain
the $3,000,000 bail demanded, the fallen boss was sent to jail.
He escaped to Cuba, and finally to Spain, but he was again
arrested, returned to New York on a man-of-war, and put into
Ludlow Street jail, where he died April 12, 1878, apparently
without money or friends.

The exact amount of the plunder was never ascertained. An expert
accountant employed by the housecleaners estimated that for three
years, 1868-71, the frauds totaled between $45,000,000 and
$50,000,000. The estimate of the aldermen's committee was
$60,000,000. Tweed never gave any figures; he probably had never
counted his gains, but merely spent them as they came. O'Rourke,
one of the gang, estimated that the Ring stole about $75,000,000
during 1865-71, and that, "counting vast issues of fraudulent
bonds," the looting "probably amounted to $200,000,000."

The story of these disclosures circled the earth and still
affects the popular judgment of the American metropolis. It
seemed as though Tammany were forever discredited. But, to the
despair of reformers, in 1874 Tammany returned to power, electing
its candidate for mayor by over 9000 majority. The new boss who
maneuvered this rapid resurrection was John Kelly, a stone-mason,
known among his Irish followers as "Honest John." Besides the
political probity which the occasion demanded, he possessed a
capacity for knowing men and sensing public opinion. This enabled
him to lift the prostrate organization. He persuaded such men as
Samuel J. Tilden, the distinguished lawyer, August Belmont, a
leading financier, Horatio Seymour, who had been governor, and
Charles O'Conor, the famous advocate, to become sachems under
him. This was evidence of reform from within. Cooperation with
the Bar Association, the Taxpayers' Association, and other
similar organizations evidenced a desire of reform from without.
Kelly "bossed" the Hall until his death, June 1, 1886.

He was succeeded by Richard Croker, a machinist, prizefighter,
and gang-leader. Croker began his official career as a court
attendant under the notorious Judge Barnard and later was an
engineer in the service of the city. These places he held by
Tammany favor, and he was so useful that in 1868 he was made
alderman. A quarrel with Tweed lost him the place, but a
reconciliation soon landed him in the lucrative office of
Superintendent of Market Fees and Rents, under Connolly. In 1873
he was elected coroner and ten years later was appointed fire
commissioner. His career as boss was marked by much political
cleverness and caution and by an equal degree of moral
obtuseness.

The triumph of Tammany in 1892 was followed by such ill-disguised
corruption that the citizens of New York were again roused from
their apathy. The investigations of the Fassett Committee of the
State Senate two years previously had shown how deep the
tentacles of Tammany were thrust into the administrative
departments of the city. The Senate now appointed another
investigating committee, of which Clarence Lexow was the chairman
and John W. Goff the counsel. The Police Department came under
its special scrutiny. The disclosures revealed the connivance of
the police in stupendous election frauds. The President of the
Police Board himself had distributed at the polls the policemen
who committed these frauds. It was further revealed that vice and
crime under police protection had been capitalized on a great
scale. It was worth money to be a policeman. One police captain
testified he had paid $15,000 for his promotions; another paid
$12,000. It cost $300 to be appointed patrolman. Over six hundred
policy-shops were open, each paying $1500 a month for protection;
pool rooms paid $300 a month; bawdy-houses, from $25 to $50 per
month per inmate. And their patrons paid whatever they could be
blackmailed out of; streetwalkers, whatever they could be
wheedled out of; saloons, $20 per month; pawnbrokers, thieves,
and thugs shared with the police their profits, as did
corporations and others seeking not only favors but their rights.
The committee in its statement to the Grand Jury (March, 1892)
estimated that the annual plunder from these sources was over
$7,000,000.

During the committee's sessions Croker was in Europe on important
business. But he found time to order the closing of disreputable
resorts, and, though he was only a private citizen and three
thousand miles away, his orders were promptly obeyed.

Aroused by these disclosures and stimulated by the lashing
sermons of the Rev. Charles H. Parkhurst, the citizens of New
York, in 1894, elected a reform government, with William L.
Strong as Mayor. His administration set up for the metropolis a
new standard of city management. Colonel George E. Waring
organized, for the first time in the city's history, an efficient
streetcleaning department. Theodore Roosevelt was appointed
Police Commissioner. These men and their associates gave to New
York a period of thrifty municipal housekeeping.

But the city returned to its filth. After the incorporation of
Greater New York and the election of Robert A. Van Wyck as its
mayor, the great beast of Tammany arose and extended its eager
claws over the vast area of the new city.

The Mazet Committee was appointed by the legislature in 1899 to
investigate rumors of renewed corruption. But the inquiry which
followed was not as penetrating nor as free from partizan bias as
thoughtful citizens wished. The principal exposure was of the Lee
Trust, an attempt to monopolize the city's ice supply, in which
city officials were stockholders, the mayor to the extent of 5000
shares, valued at $500,000. It was shown, too, that Tammany
leaders were stockholders in corporations which received favors
from the city. Governor Roosevelt, however, refused to remove
Mayor Van Wyck because the evidence against him was insufficient.

The most significant testimony before the Mazet Committee was
that given by Boss Croker himself. His last public office had
been that of City Chamberlain, 1889-90, at a salary of $25,000.
Two years later he purchased for $250,000 an interest in a
stock-farm and paid over $100,000 for some noted race-horses. He
spent over half a million dollars on the English racetrack in
three years and was reputed a millionaire, owning large blocks of
city real estate. He told the committee that he virtually
determined all city nominations; and that all candidates were
assessed, even judicial candidates, from $10,000 to $25,000 for
their nominations. "We try to have a pretty effective
organization--that's what we are there for," he explained. "We
are giving the people pure organization government," even though
the organizing took "a lot of time" and was "very hard work."
Tammany members stood by one another and helped each other, not
only in politics but in business. "We want the whole business
[city business] if we can get it." If "we win, we expect everyone
to stand by us." Then he uttered what must have been to every
citizen of understanding a self-evident truth, "I am working for
my pockets all the time."

Soon afterwards Croker retired to his Irish castle, relinquishing
the leadership to Charles Murphy, the present boss. The growing
alertness of the voters, however, makes Murphy's task a more
difficult one than that of any of his predecessors. It is
doubtful if the nature of the machine has changed during all the
years of its history. Tweed and Croker were only natural products
of the system. They typify the vulgar climax of organized
looting.

In 1913 the Independent Democrats, Republicans, and Progressives
united in a fusion movement. They nominated and, after a most
spirited campaign, elected John Purroy Mitchel as mayor. He was a
young man, not yet forty, had held important city offices, and
President Wilson had appointed him Collector of the Port of New
York. His experience, his vigor, ability, and straightdealing
commended him to the friends of good government, and they were
not disappointed. The Mitchel regime set a new record for clean
and efficient municipal administration. Men of high character and
ability were enlisted in public service, and the Police
Department, under Commissioner Woods, achieved a new usefulness.
The decent citizens, not alone in the metropolis, but throughout
the country, believed with Theodore Roosevelt that Mr. Mitchel
was "the best mayor. New York ever had." But neither the
effectiveness of his administration nor the combined efforts of
the friends of good government could save him from the designs of
Tammany Hall when, in 1917, he was a candidate for reelection.
Through a tactical blunder of the Fusionists, a small Republican
group was permitted to control the party primaries and nominate a
candidate of its own; the Socialists, greatly augmented by
various pacifist groups, made heavy inroads among the
foreign-born voters. And, while the whole power and finesse of
Tammany were assiduously undermining the mayor's strength,
ethnic, religious, partizan, and geographical prejudices combined
to elect the machine candidate, Judge Hylan, a comparatively
unknown Brooklyn magistrate.

How could Tammany regain its power, and that usually within two
years, after such disclosures as we have seen? The main reason is
the scientific efficiency of the organization. The victory of
Burr in New York in 1800 was the first triumph of the first ward
machine in America, and Tammany has forgotten neither this
victory nor the methods by which it was achieved. The
organization which was then set in motion has simply been
enlarged to keep easy pace with the city's growth. There are, in
fact, two organizations, Tammany Hall, the political machine, and
Tammany Society, the "Columbian Order" organized by Mooney, which
is ruled by sachems elected by the members. Both organizations,
however, are one in spirit. We need concern ourselves only with
the organization of Tammany Hall.

The framework of Tammany Hall's machinery has always been the
general committee, still known, in the phraseology of Burr's day,
as "the Democratic-Republican General Committee." It is a very
democratic body composed of representatives from every assembly
district, apportioned according to the number of voters in the
district. The present apportionment is one committeeman for every
fifteen votes. This makes a committee of over 9000, an unwieldy
number. It is justified, however, on two very practical grounds:
first, that it is large enough to keep close to the voters; and
second, that its assessment of ten dollars a member brings in
$90,000 a year to the war chest. This general committee holds
stated meetings and appoints subcommittees. The executive
committee, composed of the leaders of the assembly districts and
the chairman and treasurer of the county committee, is the real
working body of the great committee. It attends to all important
routine matters, selects candidates for office, and conducts
their campaigns. It is customary for the members of the general
committee to designate the district leaders for the executive
committee, but they are elected by their own districts
respectively at the annual primary elections. The district leader
is a very important wheel in the machine. He not only leads his
district but represents it on the executive committee; and this
brotherhood of leaders forms the potent oligarchy of Tammany. Its
sanction crowns the high chieftain, the boss, who, in turn, must
be constantly on the alert that his throne is not undermined;
that is to say, he and his district leaders must "play politics"
within their own bailiwicks to keep their heads on their own
shoulders. After their enfranchisement in New York (1917) women
were made eligible to the general and executive committees.
Thirty-seven were at once elected to the executive committee, and
plans were made to give them one-half of the representation on
the general committee.

Each of the twenty-three assembly districts is in turn divided
into election districts of about 400 voters, each with a
precinct captain who is acquainted with every voter in his
precinct and keeps track, as far as possible, of his affairs. In
every assembly district there are headquarters and a club house,
where the voters can go in the evening and enjoy a smoke, a
bottle, and a more or less quiet game.

This organization is never dormant. And this is the key to its
vitality. There is no mystery about it. Tammany is as vigilant
between elections as it is on election day. It has always been
solicitous for the poor and the humble, who most need and best
appreciate help and attention. Every poor immigrant is welcomed,
introduced to the district headquarters, given work, or food, or
shelter. Tammany is his practical friend; and in return he is
merely to become naturalized as quickly as possible under the
wardship of a Tammany captain and by the grace of a Tammany
judge, and then to vote the Tammany ticket. The new citizen's
lessons in political science are all flavored with highly
practical notions.

Tammany's machinery enables a house-to-house canvass to be made
in one day. But this machinery must be oiled. There are three
sources of the necessary lubricant: offices, jobs, the sale of
favors; these are dependent on winning the elections. From its
very earliest days, fraud at the polls has been a Tammany
practice. As long as property qualifications were required, money
was furnished for buying houses which could harbor a whole
settlement of voters. It was not, however, until the adoption of
universal suffrage that wholesale frauds became possible or
useful; for with a limited suffrage it was necessary to sway only
a few score votes to carry an ordinary election.

Fernando Wood set a new pace in this race for votes. It has been
estimated that in 1854 there "were about 40,000 shiftless,
unprincipled persons who lived by their wits and the labor of
others. The trade of a part of these was turning primary
elections, packing nominating conventions, repeating, and
breaking up meetings." Wood also systematized naturalization. A
card bearing the following legend was the open sesame to American
citizenship:

"Common Pleas:
 Please naturalize the bearer.
 N. Seagrist, Chairman."

Seagrist was one of the men charged by an aldermanic committee
"with robbing the funeral pall of Henry Clay when his sacred
person passed through this city."

When Hoffman was first elected mayor, over 15,000 persons were
registered who could not be found at the places indicated. The
naturalization machinery was then running at high speed. In 1868,
from 25,000 to 30,000 foreigners were naturalized in New York in
six weeks. Of 156,288 votes cast in the city, 25,000 were
afterwards shown to be fraudulent. It was about this time that an
official whose duty it was to swear in the election inspectors,
not finding a Bible at hand, used a volume of Ollendorf's "New
Method of Learning to Read, Write, and Speak French." The courts
sustained this substitution on the ground that it could not
possibly have vitiated the election!

A new federal naturalization law and rigid election laws have
made wholesale frauds impossible; and the genius of Tammany is
now attempting to adjust itself to the new immigration, the new
political spirit, and the new communal vigilance. Its power is
believed by some optimistic observers to be waning. But the
evidences are not wanting that its vitality and internal
discipline are still persistent.



CHAPTER VI. LESSER OLIGARCHIES

New York City is not unique in its experience with political
bossdom. Nearly every American city, in a greater or less degree,
for longer or shorter periods, has been dominated by oligarchies.

Around Philadelphia, American sentiment has woven the memories of
great events. It still remains, of all our large cities, the most
"American." It has fewer aliens than any other, a larger
percentage of home owners, a larger number of small tradespeople
and skilled artisans--the sort of population which democracy
exalts, and who in turn are presumed to be the bulwark of
democracy. These good citizens, busied with the anxieties and
excitements of their private concerns, discovered, in the decade
following the Civil War, that their city had slipped unawares
into the control of a compact oligarchy, the notorious Gas Ring.
The city government at this time was composed of thirty-two
independent boards and departments, responsible to the council,
but responsible to the council in name only and through the
medium of a council committee. The coordinating force, the
political gravitation which impelled all these diverse boards and
council committees to act in unison, was the Gas Department. This
department was controlled by a few designing and capable
individuals under the captaincy of James McManes. They had
reduced to political servitude all the employees of the
department, numbering about two thousand. Then they had extended
their sway over other city departments, especially the police
department. Through the connivance of the police and control over
the registration of voters, they soon dominated the primaries and
the nominating conventions. They carried the banner of the
Republican party, the dominant party in Philadelphia and in the
State, under which they more easily controlled elections, for the
people voted "regular." Then every one of the city's servants was
made to pay to the Gas Ring money as well as obeisance.
Tradespeople who sold supplies to the city, contractors who did
its work, saloon-keepers and dive-owners who wanted
protection--all paid. The city's debt increased at the rate of
$3,000,000 a year, without visible evidence of the application of
money to the city's growing needs.

In 1883 the citizens finally aroused themselves and petitioned
the legislature for a new charter. They confessed: "Philadelphia
is now recognized as the worst paved and worst cleaned city in
the civilized world. The water supply is so bad that during many
weeks of the last winter it was not only distasteful and
unwholesome for drinking, but offensive for bathing purposes. The
effort to clean the streets was abandoned for months and no
attempt was made to that end until some public-spirited citizens,
at their own expense, cleaned a number of the principal
thoroughfares . . . . The physical condition of the sewers" is
"dangerous to the health and most offensive to the comfort of our
people. Public work has been done so badly that structures have
to be renewed almost as soon as finished. Others have been in
part constructed at enormous expense and then permitted to fall
to decay without completion." This is a graphic and faithful
description of the result which follows government of the Ring,
for the Ring, with the people's money. The legislature in 1885
granted Philadelphia a new charter, called the Bullitt Law, which
went into effect in 1887, and which greatly simplified the
structure of the government and centered responsibility in the
mayor. It was then necessary for the Ring to control primaries
and win elections in order to keep the city within its clutches.
So began in Philadelphia the practice of fraudulent registering
and voting on a scale that has probably never been equaled
elsewhere in America. Names taken from tombstones in the
cemeteries and from the register of births found their way to the
polling registers. Dogs, cats, horses, anything living or dead,
with a name, served the purpose.

The exposure of these frauds was undertaken in 1900 by the
Municipal League. In two wards, where the population had
decreased one per cent in ten years (1890-1900), it was found
that the registered voters had increased one hundred per cent.
>From one house sixty-two voters were registered, of sundry
occupations as follows: "Professors, bricklayers, gentlemen,
moulders, cashiers, barbers, ministers, bakers, doctors, drivers,
bartenders, plumbers, clerks, cooks, merchants, stevedores,
bookkeepers, waiters, florists, boilermakers, salesmen, soldiers,
electricians, printers, book agents, and restaurant keepers." One
hundred and twenty-two voters, according to the register, lived
at another house, including nine agents, nine machinists, nine
gentlemen, nine waiters, nine salesmen, four barbers, four
bakers, fourteen clerks, three laborers, two bartenders, a
milkman, an optician, a piano-mover, a window-cleaner, a nurse,
and so on.

On the day before the election the Municipal League sent
registered letters to all the registered voters of certain
precincts. Sixty-three per cent were returned, marked by the
postman, "not at," "deceased," "removed," "not known." Of
forty-four letters addressed to names registered from one
four-story house, eighteen were returned. From another house,
supposed to be sheltering forty-eight voters, forty-one were
returned; from another, to which sixty-two were sent, sixty-one
came back. The league reported that "two hundred and fifty-two
votes were returned in a division that had less than one hundred
legal voters within its boundaries." Repeating and ballot-box
stuffing were common. Election officers would place fifty or more
ballots in the box before the polls opened or would hand out a
handful of ballots to the recognized repeaters. The high-water
mark of boss rule was reached under Mayor Ashbridge,
"Stars-and-Stripes Sam," who had been elected in 1899. The
moderation of Martin, who had succeeded McManes as boss, was cast
aside; the mayor was himself a member of the Ring. When Ashbridge
retired, the Municipal League reported: "The four years of the
Ashbridge administration have passed into history leaving behind
them a scar on the fame and reputation of our city which will be
a long time healing. Never before, and let us hope never again,
will there be such brazen defiance of public opinion, such
flagrant disregard of public interest, such abuse of power and
responsibility for private ends."

Since that time the fortunes of the Philadelphia Ring have
fluctuated. Its hold upon the city, however, is not broken, but
is still strong enough to justify Owen Wister's observation: "Not
a Dickens, only a Zola, would have the face (and the stomach) to
tell the whole truth about Philadelphia."

St. Louis was one of the first cities of America to possess the
much-coveted home rule. The Missouri State Constitution of 1875
granted the city the power to frame its own charter, under
certain limitations. The new charter provided for a mayor elected
for four years with the power of appointing certain heads of
departments; others, however, were to be elected directly by the
people. It provided for a Municipal Assembly composed of two
houses: the Council, with thirteen members, elected at large for
four years, and the House of Delegates, with twenty-eight
members, one from each ward, elected for two years. These two
houses were given coordinate powers; one was presumed to be a
check on the other. The Assembly fixed the tax rate, granted
franchises, and passed upon all public improvements. The Police
Department was, however, under the control of the mayor and four
commissioners, the latter appointed by the Governor. The city was
usually Republican by about 8000 majority; the State was safely
Democratic. The city, until a few years ago, had few tenements
and a small floating population.

Outwardly, all seemed well with the city until 1901, when the
inside workings of its government were revealed to the public
gaze through the vengeance of a disappointed franchise-seeker.
The Suburban Railway Company sought an extension of its
franchises. It had approached the man known as the dispenser of
such favors, but, thinking his price ($145,000) too high, had
sought to deal directly with the Municipal Assembly. The price
agreed upon for the House of Delegates was $75,000; for the
Council, $60,000. These sums were placed in safety vaults
controlled by a dual lock. The representative of the Company held
one of the keys; the representative of the Assembly, the other;
so that neither party could take the money without the presence
of both. The Assembly duly granted the franchises; but property
owners along the line of the proposed extension secured an
injunction, which delayed the proceedings until the term of the
venal House of Delegates had expired. The Assemblymen, having
delivered the goods, demanded their pay. The Company, held up by
the courts, refused. Mutterings of the disappointed conspirators
reached the ear of an enterprising newspaper reporter. Thereby
the Circuit Attorney, Joseph W. Folk, struck the trail of the
gang. Both the president of the railway company and the "agent"
of the rogues of the Assembly turned state's evidence; the
safe-deposit boxes were opened, disclosing the packages
containing one hundred and thirty-five $1000 bills.

This exposure led to others--the "Central Traction Conspiracy,"
the "Lighting Deal," the "Garbage Deal." In the cleaning-up
process, thirty-nine persons were indicted, twenty-four for
bribery and fifteen for perjury.

The evidence which Folk presented in the prosecution of these
scoundrels merely confirmed what had long been an unsavory rumor:
that franchises and contracts were bought and sold like
merchandise; that the buyers were men of eminence in the city's
business affairs; and that the sellers were the people's
representatives in the Assembly. The Grand Jury reported: "Our
investigation, covering more or less fully a period of ten years
shows that, with few exceptions, no ordinance has been passed
wherein valuable privileges or franchises are granted until those
interested have paid the legislators the money demanded for
action in the particular case . . . . So long has this practice
existed that such members have come to regard the receipt of
money for action on pending measures as a legitimate perquisite
of a legislator."

These legislators, it appeared from the testimony, had formed a
water-tight ring or "combine" in 1899, for the purpose of
systematizing this traffic. A regular scale of prices was
adopted: so much for an excavation, so much per foot for a
railway switch, so much for a street pavement, so much for a
grain elevator. Edward R. Butler was the master under whose
commands for many years this trafficking was reduced to
systematic perfection. He had come to St. Louis when a young man,
had opened a blacksmith shop, had built up a good trade in
horseshoeing, and also a pliant political following in his ward.
His attempt to defeat the home rule charter in 1876 had given him
wider prominence, and he soon became the boss of the Democratic
machine. His energy, shrewdness, liberality, and capacity for
friendship gave him sway over both Republican and Democratic
votes in certain portions of the city. A prominent St. Louis
attorney says that for over twenty years "he named candidates on
both tickets, fixed, collected, and disbursed campaign
assessments, determined the results in elections, and in fine,
practically controlled the public affairs of St. Louis." He was
the agent usually sought by franchise-seekers, and he said that
had the Suburban Company dealt with him instead of with the
members of the Assembly, they might have avoided exposure. He was
indicted four times in the upheaval, twice for attempting to
bribe the Board of Health in the garbage deal--he was a
stockholder in the company seeking the contract--and twice for
bribery in the lighting contract.

Cincinnati inherited from the Civil War the domestic excitements
and political antagonisms of a border city. Its large German
population gave it a conservative political demeanor, slow to
accept changes, loyal to the Republican party as it was to the
Union. This reduced partizan opposition to a docile minority,
willing to dicker for public spoils with the intrenched majority.

George B. Cox was for thirty years the boss of this city. Events
had prepared the way for him. Following closely upon the war, Tom
Campbell, a crafty criminal lawyer, was the local leader of the
Republicans, and John R. McLean, owner of the Cincinnati
Enquirer, a very rich man, of the Democrats. These two men were
cronies: they bartered the votes of their followers. For some
years crime ran its repulsive course: brawlers, thieves,
cutthroats escaped conviction through the defensive influence of
the lawyer-boss. In 1880, Cox, who had served an apprenticeship
in his brother-in-law's gambling house, was elected to the city
council. Thence he was promoted to the decennial board of
equalization which appraised all real estate every ten years.
There followed a great decrease in the valuation of some of the
choicest holdings in the city. In 1884 there were riots in
Cincinnati. After the acquittal of two brutes who had murdered a
man for a trifling sum of money, exasperated citizens burned the
criminal court house. The barter in justice stopped, but the
barter in offices and in votes continued. The Blaine campaign
then in progress was in great danger. Cox, already a master of
the political game, promised the Republican leaders that if they
would give him a campaign fund he would turn in a Republican
majority from Cincinnati. He did; and for many years thereafter
the returns from Hamilton County, in which Cincinnati is
situated, brought cheer to Republican State headquarters on
election night.

Cox was an unostentatious, silent man, giving one the impression
of sullenness, and almost entirely lacking in those qualities of
comradeship which one usually seeks in the "Boss" type. From a
barren little room over the "Mecca" saloon, with the help of a
telephone, he managed his machine. He never obtruded himself upon
the public. He always remained in the background. Nor did he ever
take vast sums. Moderation was the rule of his loot.

By 1905 a movement set in to rid the city of machine rule. Cox
saw this movement growing in strength. So he imported boatloads
of floaters from Kentucky. These floaters registered "from dives,
and doggeries, from coal bins and water closet; no space was too
small to harbor a man." For once he threw prudence to the winds.
Exposure followed; over 2800 illegal voters were found. The
newspapers, so long docile, now provided the necessary publicity.
A little paper, the Citizen's Bulletin, which had started as a
handbill of reform, when all the dailies seemed closed to the
facts, now grew into a sturdy weekly. And, to add the capstone to
Cox's undoing, William H. Taft, the most distinguished son of
Cincinnati, then Secretary of War in President Roosevelt's
cabinet, in a campaign speech in Akron, Ohio, advised the
Republicans to repudiate him. This confounded the "regulars," and
Cox was partially beaten. The reformers elected their candidate
for mayor, but the boss retained his hold on the county and the
city council. And, in spite of all that was done, Cox remained an
influence in politics until his death, May 20, 1916.

San Francisco has had a varied and impressive political
experience. The first legislature of California incorporated the
mining town into the city of San Francisco, April 15, 1850. Its
government from the outset was corrupt and inefficient.
Lawlessness culminated in the murder of the editor of the
Bulletin, J. King of William, on May 14, 1856, and a vigilance
committee was organized to clean up the city, and watch the
ballot-box on election day.

Soon the legislature was petitioned to change the charter. The
petition recites: "Without a change in the city government which
shall diminish the weight of taxation, the city will neither be
able to discharge the interest on debts already contracted, nor
to meet the demands for current disbursements . . . . The present
condition of the streets and public improvements of the city
abundantly attest the total inefficiency of the present system."

The legislature passed the "Consolidation Act," and from 1856 to
1900 county and city were governed as a political unit. At first
the hopes for more frugal government seemed to be fulfilled. But
all encouraging symptoms soon vanished. Partizan rule followed,
encouraged by the tinkering of the legislature, which imposed on
the charter layer upon layer of amendments, dictated by partizan
craft, not by local needs. The administrative departments were
managed by Boards of Commissioners, under the dictation of "Blind
Boss Buckley," who governed his kingdom for many years with the
despotic benevolence characteristic of his kind. The citizens saw
their money squandered and their public improvements lagging. It
took twenty-five years to complete the City Hall, at a cost of
$5,500,000. An official of the Citizens' Non-partizan party, in
1895, said: "There is no city in the Union with a quarter of a
million people, which would not be the better for a little
judicious hanging."

The repeated attempts made by citizens of San Francisco to get a
new charter finally succeeded, and in 1900 the city hopefully
entered a new epoch under a charter of its own making which
contained several radical changes. Executive responsibility was
centered in the mayor, fortified by a comprehensive civil
service. The foundations were laid for municipal ownership of
public utilities, and the initiative and referendum were adopted
for all public franchises. The legislative power was vested in a
board of eighteen supervisors elected at large.

No other American city so dramatically represents the futility of
basing political optimism on a mere plan. It was only a step from
the mediocrity enthroned by the first election under the new
charter to the gross inefficiency and corruption of a new ring,
under a new boss. A Grand Jury (called the "Andrews Jury") made a
report indicating that the administration was trafficking in
favors sold to gamblers, prize-fighters, criminals, and the whole
gamut of the underworld; that illegal profits were being reaped
from illegal contracts, and that every branch of the executive
department was honeycombed with corruption. The Grand Jury
believed and said all this, but it lacked the legal proof upon
which Mayor Schmitz and his accomplices could be indicted. In
spite of this report, Schmitz was reelected in 1905 as the
candidate of the Labor-Union party.

Now graft in San Francisco became simply universal. George
Kennan, summarizing the practices of the looters, says they "took
toll everywhere from everybody and in almost every imaginable
way: they went into partnership with dishonest contractors; sold
privileges and permits to business men; extorted money from
restaurants and saloons; levied assessments on municipal
employees; shared the profits of houses of prostitution; forced
beer, whiskey, champagne, and cigars on restaurants and saloons
on commission; blackmailed gamblers, pool-sellers, and promoters
of prize-fights; sold franchises to wealthy corporations; created
such municipal bureaus as the commissary department and the city
commercial company in order to make robbery of the city more
easy; leased rooms and buildings for municipal offices at
exorbitant rates, and compelled the lessees to share profits;
held up milkmen, kite-advertisers, junk-dealers, and even
street-sweepers; and took bribes from everybody who wanted an
illegal privilege and was willing to pay for it. The motto of the
administration seemed to be 'Encourage dishonesty, and then let
no dishonest dollar escape.'"

The machinery through which this was effected was simple: the
mayor had vast appointing powers and by this means directly
controlled all the city departments. But the mayor was only an
automaton. Back of him was Abe Ruef, the Boss, an unscrupulous
lawyer who had wormed his way into the labor party, and
manipulated the "leaders" like puppets. Ruef's game also was
elementary. He sold his omnipotence for cash, either under the
respectable cloak of "retainer" or under the more common device
of commissions and dividends, so that thugs retained him for
their freedom, contractors for the favors they expected, and
public service corporations for their franchises.

Finally, through the persistence of a few private citizens, a
Grand Jury was summoned. Under the foremanship of B. P. Oliver it
made a thorough investigation. Francis J. Heney was employed as
special prosecutor and William J. Burns as detective. Heney and
Burns formed an aggressive team. The Ring proved as vulnerable as
it was rotten. Over three hundred indictments were returned,
involving persons in every walk of life. Ruef was sentenced to
fourteen years in the penitentiary. Schmitz was freed on a
technicality, after being found guilty and sentenced to five
years. Most of the other indictments were not tried, the
prosecutor's attention having been diverted to the trail of the
franchise-seekers, who have thus far eluded conviction.

Minneapolis, a city blending New England traditions with
Scandinavian thrift, illustrates, in its experiences with "Doe"
Ames, the maneuvers of the peripatetic boss. Ames was four times
mayor of the city, but never his own successor. Each succeeding
experience with him grew more lurid of indecency, until his third
term was crystallized in Minneapolis tradition as "the notorious
Ames administration." Domestic scandal made him a social outcast,
political corruption a byword, and Ames disappeared from public
view for ten years.

In 1900 a new primary law provided the opportunity to return him
to power for the fourth time. Ames, who had been a Democrat, now
found it convenient to become a Republican. The new law, like
most of the early primary laws, permitted members of one party to
vote in the primaries of the other party. So Ames's following,
estimated at about fifteen hundred, voted in the Republican
primaries, and he became a regular candidate of that party in a
presidential year, when citizens felt the special urge to vote
for the party.

Ames was the type of boss with whom discipline is secondary to
personal aggrandizement. He had a passion for popularity; was
imposing of presence; possessed considerable professional skill;
and played constantly for the support of the poor. The attacks
upon him he turned into political capital by saying that he was
made a victim by the rich because he championed the poor.
Susceptible to flattery and fond of display, he lacked the power
to command. He had followers, not henchmen. His following was
composed of the lowly, who were duped by his phrases, and of
criminals, who knew his bent; and they followed him into any
party whither he found it convenient to go, Republican,
Democratic, or Populist.

The charter of Minneapolis gave the mayor considerable appointing
power. He was virtually the dictator of the Police Department.
This was the great opportunity of Ames and his floating vote. His
own brother, a weak individual with a dubious record, was made
Chief of Police. Within a few weeks about one-half of the police
force was discharged, and the places filled with men who could be
trusted by the gang. The number of detectives was increased and
an ex-gambler placed at their head. A medical student from Ames's
office was commissioned a special policeman to gather loot from
the women of the street.

Through a telepathy of their own, the criminal classes all over
the country soon learned of the favorable conditions in
Minneapolis, under which every form of gambling and low vice
flourished; and burglars, pickpockets, safe-blowers, and harlots
made their way thither. Mr. W. A. Frisbie, the editor of a
leading Minneapolis paper, described the situation in the
following words: "It is no exaggeration to say that in this
period fully 99% of the police department's efficiency was
devoted to the devising and enforcing of blackmail. Ordinary
patrolmen on beats feared to arrest known criminals for fear the
prisoners would prove to be 'protected'. . . .The horde of
detective favorites hung lazily about police headquarters,
waiting for some citizen to make complaint of property stolen,
only that they might enforce additional blackmail against the
thief, or possibly secure the booty for themselves. One detective
is now [1903] serving time in the state prison for retaining a
stolen diamond pin."

The mayor thought he had a machine for grinding blackmail from
every criminal operation in his city, but he had only a gang,
without discipline or coordinating power, and weakened by
jealousy and suspicion. The wonder is that it lasted fifteen
months. Then came the "April Grand Jury," under the foremanship
of a courageous and resourceful business man. The regime of
criminals crumbled; forty-nine indictments, involving twelve
persons, were returned.

The Grand Jury, however, at first stood alone in its
investigations. The crowd of politicians and vultures were
against it, and no appropriations were granted for getting
evidence. So its members paid expenses out of their own pockets,
and its foreman himself interviewed prisoners and discovered the
trail that led to the Ring's undoing. Ames's brother was
convicted on second trial and sentenced to six and a half years
in the penitentiary, while two of his accomplices received
shorter terms. Mayor Ames, under indictment and heavy bonds, fled
to Indiana.

The President of the City Council, a business man of education,
tact, and sincerity, became mayor, for an interim of four months;
enough time, as it proved, for him to return the city to its
normal political life.

These examples are sufficient to illustrate the organization and
working of the municipal machine. It must not be imagined by the
reader that these cities alone, and a few others made notorious
by the magazine muck-rakers, are the only American cities that
have developed oligarchies. In truth, not a single American city,
great or small, has entirely escaped, for a greater or lesser
period, the sway of a coterie of politicians. It has not always
been a corrupt sway; but it has rarely, if ever, given efficient
administration.

Happily there are not wanting signs that the general conditions
which have fostered the Ring are disappearing. The period of
reform set in about 1890, when people began to be interested in
the study of municipal government. It was not long afterwards
that the first authoritative books on the subject appeared. Then
colleges began to give courses in municipal government; editors
began to realize the public's concern in local questions and to
discuss neighborhood politics as well as national politics. By
1900 a new era broke--the era of the Grand Jury. Nothing so
hopeful in local politics had occurred in our history as the
disclosures which followed. They provoked the residuum of
conscience in the citizenry and the determination that honesty
should rule in public business and politics as well as in private
transactions. The Grand Jury inquisitions, however, demonstrated
clearly that the criminal law was no remedy for municipal
misrule. The great majority of floaters and illegal voters who
were indicted never faced a trial jury. The results of the
prosecutions for bribery and grosser political crimes were
scarcely more encouraging. It is true that one Abe Ruef in a
California penitentiary is worth untold sermons, editorials, and
platform admonitions, and serves as a potent warning to all
public malefactors. Yet the example is soon forgotten; and the
people return to their former political habits.

But out of this decade of gang-hunting and its impressive
experiences with the shortcomings of our criminal laws came the
new municipal era which we have now fully entered, the era of
enlightened administration. This new era calls for a
reconstruction of the city government. Its principal feature is
the rapid spread of the Galveston or Commission form of
government and of its modification, the City Manager plan, the
aim of which is to centralize governmental authority and to
entice able men into municipal office. And there are many other
manifestations of the new civic spirit. The mesmeric influence of
national party names in civic politics is waning; the rise of
home rule for the city is severing the unholy alliance between
the legislature and the local Ring; the power to grant franchises
is being taken away from legislative bodies and placed directly
with the people; nominations are passing out of the hands of
cliques and are being made the gift of the voters through
petitions and primaries; efficient reforms in the taxing and
budgetary machinery have been instituted, and the development of
the merit system in the civil service is creating a class of
municipal experts beyond the reach of political gangsters.

There have sprung up all sorts of collateral organizations to
help the officials: societies for municipal research, municipal
reference libraries, citizens' unions, municipal leagues, and
municipal parties. These are further supplemented by
organizations which indirectly add to the momentum of practical,
enlightened municipal sentiment: boards of commerce, associations
of business and professional men of every variety, women's clubs,
men's clubs, children's clubs, recreation clubs, social clubs,
every one with its own peculiar vigilance upon some corner of the
city's affairs. So every important city is guarded by a network
of voluntary organizations.

All these changes in city government, in municipal laws and
political mechanisms, and in the people's attitude toward their
cities, have tended to dignify municipal service. The city job
has been lifted to a higher plane. Lord Rosebery, the brilliant
chairman of the first London County Council, the governing body
of the world's largest city, said many years ago: "I wish that my
voice could extend to every municipality in the kingdom, and
impress upon every man, however high his position, however great
his wealth, however consummate his talents may be, the importance
and nobility of municipal work." It is such a spirit as this that
has made the government of Glasgow a model of democratic
efficiency; and it is the beginnings of this spirit that the
municipal historian finds developing in the last twenty years of
American life. It is indeed difficult to see how our cities can
slip back again into the clutches of bosses and rings and repeat
the shameful history of the last decades of the nineteenth
century.



CHAPTER VII. LEGISLATIVE OMNIPOTENCE

The American people, when they wrote their first state
constitutions, were filled with a profound distrust of executive
authority, the offspring of their experience with the arbitrary
King George. So they saw to it that the executive authority in
their own government was reduced to its lowest terms, and that
the legislative authority, which was presumed to represent the
people, was exalted to legal omnipotence. In the original States,
the legislature appointed many of the judicial and administrative
officers; it was above the executive veto; it had political
supremacy; it determined the form of local governments and
divided the State into election precincts; it appointed the
delegates to the Continental Congress, towards which it displayed
the attitude of a sovereign. It was altogether the most important
arm of the state government; in fact it virtually was the state
government. The Federal Constitution created a government of
specified powers, reserving to the States all authority not
expressly given to the central government. Congress can legislate
only on subjects permitted by the Constitution; on the other
hand, a state legislature can legislate on any subject not
expressly forbidden. The state legislature possesses authority
over a far wider range of subjects than Congress--subjects,
moreover, which press much nearer to the daily activities of the
citizens, such as the wide realm of private law, personal
relations, local government, and property.

In the earlier days, men of first-class ability, such as
Alexander Hamilton, Samuel Adams, and James Madison, did not
disdain membership in the state legislatures. But the development
of party spirit and machine politics brought with it a great
change. Then came the legislative caucus; and party politics soon
reigned in every capital. As the legislature was ruled by the
majority, the dominant party elected presiding officers,
designated committees, appointed subordinates, and controlled
lawmaking. The party was therefore in a position to pay its
political debts and bestow upon its supporters valuable favors.
Further, as the legislature apportioned the various electoral
districts, the dominant party could, by means of the gerrymander,
entrench itself even in unfriendly localities. And, to crown its
political power, it elected United States Senators. But, as the
power of the party increased, unfortunately the personnel of the
legislature deteriorated. Able men, as a rule, shunned a service
that not only took them from their private affairs for a number
of months, but also involved them in partizan rivalries and
trickeries. Gradually the people came to lose confidence in the
legislative body and to put their trust more in the Executive or
else reserved governmental powers to themselves. It was about
1835 that the decline of the legislature's powers set in, when
new state constitutions began to clip its prerogatives, one after
another.

The bulky constitutions now adopted by most of the States are
eloquent testimony to the complete collapse of the legislature as
an administrative body and to the people's general distrust of
their chosen representatives. The initiative, referendum, recall,
and the withholding of important subjects from the legislature's
power, are among the devices intended to free the people from the
machinations of their wilful representatives.

Now, most of the evils which these heroic measures have sought to
remedy can be traced directly to the partizan ownership of the
state legislature. The boss controlling the members of the
legislature could not only dole out his favors to the privilege
seekers; he could assuage the greed of the municipal ring; and
could, to a lesser degree, command federal patronage by an
entente cordiale with congressmen and senators; and through his
power in presidential conventions and elections he had a direct
connection with the presidential office itself.

It was in the days before the legislature was prohibited from
granting, by special act, franchises and charters, when banks,
turnpike companies, railroads, and all sorts of corporations came
asking for charters, that the figure of the lobbyist first
appeared. He acted as a middleman between the seeker and the
giver. The preeminent figure of this type in state and
legislative politics for several decades preceding the Civil War
was Thurlow Weed of New York. As an influencer of legislatures,
he stands easily first in ability and achievement. His great
personal attractions won him willing followers whom he knew how
to use. He was party manager, as well as lobbyist and boss in a
real sense long before that term was coined. His capacity for
politics amounted to genius. He never sought office; and his
memory has been left singularly free from taint. He became the
editor of the Albany Journal and made it the leading Whig
"up-state" paper. His friend Seward, whom he had lifted into the
Governor's chair, passed on to the United States Senate; and when
Horace Greeley with the New York Tribune joined their forces,
this potent triumvirate ruled the Empire State. Greeley was its
spokesman, Seward its leader, but Weed was its designer. From his
room No. 11 in the old Astor House, he beckoned to forces that
made or unmade presidents, governors, ambassadors, congressmen,
judges, and legislators.

With the tremendous increase of business after the Civil War, New
York City became the central office of the nation's business, and
many of the interests centered there found it wise to have
permanent representatives at Albany to scrutinize every bill that
even remotely touched their welfare, to promote legislation that
was frankly in their favor, and to prevent "strikes"--the bills
designed for blackmail. After a time, however, the number of
"strikes" decreased, as well as the number of lobbyists attending
the session. The corporate interests had learned efficiency.
Instead of dealing with legislators individually, they arranged
with the boss the price of peace or of desirable legislation. The
boss transmitted his wishes to his puppets. This form of
government depends upon a machine that controls the legislature.
In New York both parties were moved by machines. "Tom" Platt was
the "easy boss" of the Republicans; and Tammany and its.
"up-state" affiliations controlled the Democrats. "Right here,"
says Platt in his Autobiography (1910), "it may be appropriate to
say that I have had more or less to do with the organization of
the New York legislature since 1873." He had. For forty years he
practically named the Speaker and committees when his party won,
and he named the price when his party lost. All that an
"interest" had to do, under the new plan, was to "see the boss,"
and the powers of government were delivered into its lap.

Some of this legislative bargaining was revealed in the insurance
investigation of 1905, conducted by the Armstrong Committee with
Charles E. Hughes as counsel. Officers of the New York Life
Insurance Company testified that their company had given $50,000
to the Republican campaign of 1904. An item of $235,000,
innocently charged to "Home office annex account," was traced to
the hands of a notorious lobbyist at Albany. Three insurance
companies had paid regularly $50,000 each to the Republican
campaign fund. Boss Platt himself was compelled reluctantly to
relate how he had for fifteen years received ten one thousand
dollar bundles of greenbacks from the Equitable Life as
"consideration" for party goods delivered. John A. McCall,
President of the New York Life, said: "I don't care about the
Republican side of it or the Democratic side of it. It doesn't
count at all with me. What is best for the New York Life moves
and actuates me."

In another investigation Mr. H. O. Havemeyer of the Sugar Trust
said: "We have large interests in this State; we need police
protection and fire protection; we need everything that the city
furnishes and gives, and we have to support these things. Every
individual and corporation and firm--trust or whatever you call
it--does these things and we do them." No distinction is made,
then, between the government that ought to furnish this
"protection" and the machine that sells it!

No episode in recent political history shows better the relations
of the legislature to the political machine and the great power
of invisible government than the impeachment and removal of
Governor William Sulzer in 1913. Sulzer had been four times
elected to the legislature. He served as Speaker in 1893. He was
sent to Congress by an East Side district in New York City in
1895 and served continuously until his nomination for Governor of
New York in 1912. All these years he was known as a Tammany man.
During his campaign for Governor he made many promises for
reform, and after his election he issued a bombastic declaration
of independence. His words were discounted in the light of his
previous record. Immediately after his inauguration, however, he
began a house-cleaning. He set to work an economy and efficiency
commission; he removed a Tammany superintendent of prisons; made
unusually good appointments without paying any attention to the
machine; and urged upon the legislature vigorous and vital laws.

But the Tammany party had a large working majority in both
houses, and the changed Sulzer was given no support. The crucial
moment came when an emasculated primary law was handed to him for
his signature. An effective primary law had been a leading
campaign issue, all the parties being pledged to such an
enactment. The one which the Governor was now requested to sign
had been framed by the machine to suit its pleasure. The Governor
vetoed it. The legislature adjourned on the 3rd of May. The
Governor promptly reconvened it in extra session (June 7th) for
the purpose of passing an adequate primary law. Threats that had
been made against him by the machine now took form. An
investigating committee, appointed by the Senate to examine the
Governor's record, largely by chance happened upon "pay dirt,"
and early on the morning of the 13th of August, after an
all-night session, the Assembly passed a motion made by its
Tammany floor leader to impeach the Governor.

The articles of impeachment charged: first, that the Governor had
filed a false report of his campaign expenses; second, that since
he had made such statement under oath he was guilty of perjury;
third, that he had bribed witnesses to withhold testimony from
the investigating committee; fourth, that he had used threats in
suppression of evidence before the same tribunal; fifth, that he
had persuaded a witness from responding to the committee's
subpoena; sixth, that he had used campaign contributions for
private speculation in the stock market; seventh, that he had
used his power as Governor to influence the political action of
certain officials; lastly, that he had used this power for
affecting the stock market to his gain.

Unfortunately for the Governor, the first, second, and sixth
charges had a background of facts, although the rest were
ridiculous and trivial. By a vote of 43 to 12 he was removed from
the governorship. The proceeding was not merely an impeachment of
New York's Governor. It was an impeachment of its government.
Every citizen knew that if Sulzer had obeyed Murphy, his
shortcomings would never have been his undoing.

The great commonwealth of Pennsylvania was for sixty years under
the domination of the House of Cameron and the House of Quay.
Simon Cameron's entry into public notoriety was symbolic of his
whole career. In 1838, he was one of a commission of two to
disburse to the Winnebago Indians at Prairie du Chien $100,000 in
gold. But, instead of receiving gold, the poor Indians received
only a few thousand dollars in the notes of a bank of which
Cameron was the cashier. Cameron was for this reason called "the
Great Winnebago." He built a large fortune by canal and railway
contracts, and later by rolling-mills and furnaces. He was one
of the first men in American politics to purchase political power
by the lavish use of cash, and to use political power for the
gratification of financial greed. In 1857 he was elected to the
United States Senate as a Republican by a legislature in which
the Democrats had a majority. Three Democrats voted for him, and
so bitter was the feeling against the renegade trio that no hotel
in Harrisburg would shelter them.

In 1860 he was a candidate for the Republican presidential
nomination. President Lincoln made him Secretary of War. But his
management was so ill-savored that a committee of leading
business men from the largest cities of the country told the
President that it was impossible to transact business with such a
man. These complaints coupled with other considerations moved
Lincoln to dismiss Cameron. He did so in characteristic fashion.
On January 11, 1862, he sent Cameron a curt note saying that he
proposed to appoint him minister to Russia. And thither into
exile Cameron went. A few months later, the House of
Representatives passed a resolution of censure, citing Cameron's
employment of irresponsible persons and his purchase of supplies
by private contract instead of competitive bidding. The
resolution, however, was later expunged from the records; and
Cameron, on his return from Russia, again entered the Senate
under circumstances so suspicious that only the political
influence of the boss thwarted an action for bribery. In 1877 he
resigned, naming as his successor his son "Don," who was promptly
elected.

In the meantime another personage had appeared on the scene.
"Cameron made the use of money an essential to success in
politics, but Quay made politics expensive beyond the most
extravagant dreams." From the time he arrived of age until his
death, with the exception of three or four years, Matthew S. Quay
held public office. When the Civil War broke out, he had been for
some time prothonotary of Beaver County, and during the war he
served as Governor Curtin's private secretary. In 1865 he was
elected to the legislature. In 1877 he induced the legislature to
resurrect the discarded office of Recorder of Philadelphia, and
for two years he collected the annual fees of $40,000. In 1887 he
was elected to the United States Senate, in which he remained
except for a brief interval until his death.

In 1899 came revelations of Quay's substantial interests in state
moneys. The suicide of the cashier of the People's Bank of
Philadelphia, which was largely owned by politicians and was a
favorite depository of state funds, led to an investigation of
the bank's affairs, and disclosed the fact that Quay and some of
his associates had used state funds for speculation. Quay's
famous telegram to the cashier was found among the dead
official's papers, "If you can buy and carry a thousand Met. for
me I will shake the plum tree."

Quay was indicted, but escaped trial by pleading the statute of
limitations as preventing the introduction of necessary evidence
against him. A great crowd of shouting henchmen accosted him as a
hero when he left the courtroom, and escorted him to his hotel.
And the legislature soon thereafter elected him to his third term
in the Senate.

Pittsburgh, as well as Philadelphia, had its machine which was
carefully geared to Quay's state machine. The connection was made
clear by the testimony of William Flinn, a contractor boss,
before a committee of the United States Senate. Flinn explained
the reason for a written agreement between Quay on the one hand
and Flinn and one Brown in behalf of Chris Magee, the Big Boss,
on the other, for the division of the sovereignty of western
Pennsylvania. "Senator Quay told me," said Flinn, "that he would
not permit us to elect the Republican candidate for mayor in
Pittsburghh unless we adjust the politics to suit him." The
people evidently had nothing to say about it.

The experiences of New York and Pennsylvania are by no means
isolated; they are illustrative. Very few States have escaped a
legislative scandal. In particular, Rhode Island, Delaware,
Illinois, Colorado, Montana, California, Ohio, Mississippi, Texas
can give pertinent testimony to the willingness of legislatures
to prostitute their great powers to the will of the boss or the
machine.



CHAPTER VIII. THE NATIONAL HIERARCHY

American political maneuver culminates at Washington. The
Presidency and membership in the Senate and the House of
Representatives are the great stakes. By a venerable tradition,
scrupulously followed, the judicial department is kept beyond the
reach of party greed.

The framers of the Constitution believed that they had contrived
a method of electing the President and Vice-President which would
preserve the choice from partizan taint. Each State should choose
a number of electors "equal to the whole number of Senators and
Representatives to which the State maybe entitled in the
Congress." These electors were to form an independent body, to
meet in their respective States and "ballot for two persons," and
send the result of their balloting to the Capitol, where the
President of the Senate, in the presence of the Senate and the
House of Representatives, opened the certificates and counted the
votes. The one receiving the greatest number of votes was to be
declared elected President, the one receiving the next highest
number of votes, Vice-President. George Washington was the only
President elected by such an autonomous group. The election of
John Adams was bitterly contested, and the voters knew, when they
were casting their ballots in 1796, whether they were voting for
a Federalist or a Jeffersonian. From that day forward this
greatest of political prizes has been awarded through partizan
competition. In 1804 the method of selecting the Vice-President
was changed by the twelfth constitutional amendment. The electors
since that time ballot for President and Vice-President. Whatever
may be the legal privileges of the members of the Electoral
College, they are considered, by the voters, as agents of the
party upon whose tickets their names appear, and to abuse this
relationship would universally be deemed an act of perfidy.

The Constitution permits the legislatures of the States to
determine how the electors shall be chosen. In the earlier
period, the legislatures elected them; later they were elected by
the people; sometimes they were elected at large, but usually
they were chosen by districts. And this is now the general
custom. Since the development of direct nominations, there has
been a strong movement towards the abolition of the Electoral
College and the election of the President by direct vote.

The President is the most powerful official in our government and
in many respects he is the most powerful ruler in the world. He
is Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Navy. His is virtually the
sole responsibility in conducting international relations. He is
at the head of the civil administration and all the important
administrative departments are answerable to him. He possesses a
vast power of appointment through which he dispenses political
favors. His wish is potent in shaping legislation and his veto is
rarely overridden. With Congress he must be in daily contact; for
the Senate has the power of ratifying or discarding his
appointments and of sanctioning or rejecting his treaties with
foreign countries; and the House of Representatives originates
all money bills and thus possesses a formidable check upon
executive usurpation.

The Constitution originally reposed the choice of United States
Senators with the state legislatures. A great deal of virtue was
to flow from such an indirect election. The members of the
legislature were presumed to act with calm judgment and to choose
only the wise and experienced for the dignity of the toga. And
until the period following the Civil War the great majority of
the States delighted to send their ablest statesmen to the
Senate. Upon its roll we find the names of many of our
illustrious orators and jurists. After the Civil War, when the
spirit of commercialism invaded every activity, men who were
merely rich began to aspire to senatorial honors. The debauch of
the state legislatures which was revealed in the closing year of
the nineteenth century and the opening days of the twentieth so
revolted the people that the seventeenth constitutional amendment
was adopted (1913) providing for the election of senators by
direct vote.

The House of Representatives was designed to be the" popular
house." Its election from small districts, by direct vote, every
two years is a guarantee of its popular character. From this
characteristic it has never departed. It is the People's House.
It originates all revenue measures. On its floor, in the rough
and tumble of debate, partizan motives are rarely absent.

Upon this national tripod, the Presidency, the Senate, and the
House, is builded the vast national party machine. Every citizen
is familiar with the outer aspect of these great national parties
as they strive in placid times to create a real issue of the
tariff, or imperialism, or what not, so as to establish at least
an ostensible difference between them; or as they, in critical
times, make the party name synonymous with national security. The
high-sounding platforms, the frenzied orators, the parades, mass
meetings, special trains, pamphlets, books, editorials,
lithographs, poster--all these paraphernalia are conjured up in
the voter's mind when he reads the words Democratic and
Republican.

But, from the standpoint of the professional politician, all this
that the voter sees is a mask, the patriotic veneer to hide the
machine, that complex hierarchy of committees ranging from
Washington to every cross-roads in the Republic. The committee
system, described in a former chapter, was perfected by the
Republican party during the days of the Civil War, under the
stress of national necessity. The great party leaders were then
in Congress. When the assassination of Lincoln placed Andrew
Johnson in power, the bitter quarrel between Congress and the
President firmly united the Republicans; and in order to carry
the mid-election in 1866, they organized a Congressional Campaign
Committee to conduct the canvass. This practice has been
continued by both parties, and in "off" years it plays a very
prominent part in the party campaign. Congress alone, however,
was only half the conquest. It was only through control of the
Administration that access was gained to the succulent herbage of
federal pasturage and that vast political prestige with the voter
was achieved.

The President is nominally the head of his party. In reality he
may not be; he may be only the President. That depends upon his
personality, his desires, his hold upon Congress and upon the
people, and upon the circumstances of the hour. During the Grant
Administration, as already described, there existed, in every
sense of the term, a federal machine. It held Congress, the
Executive, and the vast federal patronage in its power. All the
federal office-holders, all the postmasters and their assistants,
revenue collectors, inspectors, clerks, marshals, deputies,
consuls, and ambassadors were a part of the organization,
contributing to its maintenance. We often hear today of the
"Federal Crowd," a term used to describe such appointees as still
subsist on presidential and senatorial favor. In Grant's time,
this "crowd" was a genuine machine, constructed, unlike some of
its successors, from the center outward. But the "boss" of this
machine was not the President. It was controlled by a group of
leading Congressmen, who used their power for dictating
appointments and framing "desirable" legislation. Grant, in the
imagination of the people, symbolized the cause their sacrifices
had won; and thus his moral prestige became the cloak of the
political plotters.

A number of the ablest men in the Republican party, however,
stood aloof; and by 1876 a movement against the manipulators had
set in. Civil service reform had become a real issue. Hayes, the
"dark horse" who was nominated in that year, declared, in
accepting the nomination, that "reform should be thorough,
radical, and complete." He promised not to be a candidate for a
second term, thus avoiding the temptation, to which almost every
President has succumbed, of using the patronage to secure his
reelection. The party managers pretended not to hear these
promises. And when Hayes, after his inauguration, actually began
to put them into force, they set the whole machinery of the party
against the President. Matters came to a head when the President
issued an order commanding federal office-holders to refrain from
political activity. This order was generally defied, especially
in New York City in the post-office and customs rings. Two
notorious offenders, Cornell and Arthur, were dismissed from
office by the President. But the Senate, influenced by Roscoe
Conkling's power, refused to confirm the President's new
appointees; and under the Tenure of Office Act, which had been
passed to tie President Johnson's hands, the offenders remained
in office over a year. The fight disciplined the President and
the machine in about equal proportions. The President became more
amenable and the machine less arbitrary.

President Garfield attempted the impossible feat of obliging both
the politicians and the reformers. He was persuaded to make
nominations to federal offices in New York without consulting
either of the senators from that State, Conkling and Platt.
Conkling appealed to the Senate to reject the New York appointees
sent in by the President. The Senate failed to sustain him.
Conkling and his colleague Platt resigned from the Senate and
appealed to the New York legislature, which also refused to
sustain them.

While this absurd farce was going on, a more serious ferment was
brewing. On July 2, 1881, President Garfield was assassinated by
a disappointed office-seeker named Guiteau. The attention of the
people was suddenly turned from the ridiculous diversion of the
Conkling incident to the tragedy and its cause. They saw the
chief office in their gift a mere pawn in the game of
place-seekers, the time and energy of their President wasted in
bickerings with congressmen over petty appointments, and the
machinery of their Government dominated by the machinery of the
party for ignoble or selfish ends.

At last the advocates of reform found their opportunity. In 1883
the Civil Service Act was passed, taking from the President about
14,000 appointments. Since then nearly every President, towards
the end of his term, especially his second term, has added to the
numbers, until nearly two-thirds of the federal offices are now
filled by examination. President Cleveland during his second term
made sweeping additions. President Roosevelt found about 100,000
in the classified service and left 200,000. President Taft,
before his retirement, placed in the classified service assistant
postmasters and clerks in first and second-class postoffices,
about 42,000 rural delivery carriers, and over 20,000 skilled
workers in the navy yards.

The appointing power of the President, however, still remains the
principal point of his contact with the machine. He has, of
course, other means of showing partizan favors. Tariff laws, laws
regulating interstate commerce, reciprocity treaties, "pork
barrels," pensions, financial policies, are all pregnant with
political possibilities.

The second official unit in the national political hierarchy is
the House of Representatives, controlling the pursestrings, which
have been the deadly noose of many executive measures. The House
is elected every two years, so that it may ever be "near to the
people"! This produces a reflex not anticipated by the Fathers of
the Constitution. It gives the representative brief respite from
the necessities of politics, and hence little time for the
necessities of the State.

The House attained the zenith of its power when it arraigned
President Johnson at the bar of the Senate for high crimes and
misdemeanors in office. It had shackled his appointing power by
the Tenure of Office Act; it had forced its plan of
reconstruction over his veto; and now it led him, dogged and
defiant, to a political trial. Within a few years the character
of the House changed. A new generation interested in the issues
of prosperity, rather than those of the war, entered public life.
The House grew unwieldy in size and its business increased
alarmingly. The minority, meanwhile, retained the power, through
filibustering, to hold up the business of the country.

It was under such conditions that Speaker Reed, in 1890, crowned
himself "Czar" by compelling a quorum. This he did by counting as
actually present all members whom the clerk reported as "present
but not voting." The minority fought desperately for its last
privilege and even took a case to the Supreme Court to test the
constitutionality of a law passed by a Reed-made quorum. The
court concurred with the sensible opinion of the country that
"when the quorum is present, it is there for the purpose of doing
business," an opinion that was completely vindicated when the
Democratic minority became a majority and adopted the rule for
its own advantage.

By this ruling, the Speakership was lifted to a new eminence. The
party caucus, which nominated the Speaker, and to which momentous
party questions were referred, gave solidarity to the party. But
the influence of the Speaker, through his power of appointing
committees, of referring bills, of recognizing members who wished
to participate in debate, insured that discipline and centralized
authority which makes mass action effective. The power of the
Speaker was further enlarged by the creation of the Rules
Committee, composed of the Speaker and two members from each
party designated by him. This committee formed a triumvirate (the
minority members were merely formal members) which set the limits
of debate, proposed special rules for such occasions as the
committee thought proper, and virtually determined the destiny of
bills. So it came about, as Bryce remarks, that the choice of the
Speaker was "a political event of the highest significance."

It was under the regency of Speaker Cannon that the power of the
Speaker's office attained its climax. The Republicans had a large
majority in the House and the old war-horses felt like colts.
They assumed their leadership, however, with that obliviousness
to youth which usually characterizes old age. The gifted and
attractive Reed had ruled often by aphorism and wit, but the
unimaginative Cannon ruled by the gavel alone; and in the course
of time he and his clique of veterans forgot entirely the
difference between power and leadership.

Even party regularity could not long endure such tyranny. It was
not against party organization that the insurgents finally raised
their lances, but against the arbitrary use of the machinery of
the organization by a small group of intrenched "standpatters."
The revolt began during the debate on the Payne-Aldrich tariff,
and in the campaign of 1908 "Cannonism" was denounced from the
stump in every part of the country. By March, 1910, the
insurgents were able, with the aid of the Democrats, to amend the
rules, increasing the Committee on Rules to ten to be elected by
the House and making the Speaker ineligible for membership. When
the Democrats secured control of the House in the following year,
the rules were revised, and the selection of all committees is
now determined by a Committee on Committees chosen in party
caucus. This change shifts arbitrary power from the shoulders of
the Speaker to the shoulders of the party chieftains. The power
of the Speaker has been lessened but by no means destroyed. He is
still the party chanticleer.

The political power of the House, however, cannot be calculated
without admitting to the equation the Senate, the third official
unit, and, indeed, the most powerful factor in the national
hierarchy. The Senate shares equally with the House the
responsibility of lawmaking, and shares with the President the
responsibility of appointments and of treaty-making. It has been
the scene of many memorable contests with the President for
political control. The senators are elder statesmen, who have
passed through the refining fires of experience, either in law,
business, or politics. A senator is elected for six years; so
that he has a period of rest between elections, in which he may
forget his constituents in the ardor of his duties.

Within the last few decades a great change has come over the
Senate, over its membership, its attitude towards public
questions, and its relation to the electorate. This has been
brought about through disclosures tending to show the relations
on the part of some senators towards "big business." As early as
the Granger revelations of railway machinations in politics, in
the seventies, a popular distrust of the Senate became
pronounced. No suggestion of corruption was implied, but certain
senators were known as "railway senators," and were believed to
use their partizan influence in their friends' behalf. This
feeling increased from year to year, until what was long
suspected came suddenly to light, through an entirely unexpected
agency. William Randolph Hearst, a newspaper owner who had in
vain attempted to secure a nomination for President by the
Democrats and to get himself elected Governor of New York, had
organized and financed a party of his own, the Independence
League. While speaking in behalf of his party, in the fall of
1908, he read extracts from letters written by an official of the
Standard Oil Company to various senators. The letters, it later
appeared, had been purloined from the Company's files by a
faithless employee. They caused a tremendous sensation. The
public mind had become so sensitive that the mere fact that an
intimacy existed between the most notorious of trusts and some
few United States senators--the correspondents called each other
"Dear John," "Dear Senator," etc.--was sufficient to arouse the
general wrath. The letters disclosed a keen interest on the part
of the corporation in the details of legislation, and the public
promptly took the Standard Oil Company as a type. They believed,
without demanding tangible proof, that other great corporations
were, in some sinister manner, influencing legislation.
Railroads, insurance companies, great banking concerns, vast
industrial corporations, were associated in the public mind as
"the Interests." And the United States Senate was deemed the
stronghold of the interests. A saturnalia of senatorial
muckraking now laid bare the "oligarchy," as the small group of
powerful veteran Senators who controlled the senatorial machinery
was called. It was disclosed that the centralization of
leadership in the Senate coincided with the centralization of
power in the Democratic and Republican national machines. In 1911
and 1912 a "money trust" investigation was conducted by the
Senate and a comfortable entente was revealed between a group of
bankers, insurance companies, manufacturers, and other interests,
carried on through an elaborate system of interlocking
directorates. Finally, in 1912, the Senate ordered its Committee
on Privileges and Elections to investigate campaign contributions
paid to the national campaign committees in 1904, 1908, and 1912.
The testimony taken before this committee supplied the country
with authentic data of the interrelations of Big Business and Big
Politics.

The revolt against "Cannonism" in the House had its counterpart
in the Senate. By the time the Aldrich tariff bill came to a vote
(1909), about ten Republican senators rebelled. The revolt
gathered momentum and culminated in 1912 in the organization of
the National Progressive party with Theodore Roosevelt as its
candidate for President and Hiram Johnson of California for Vice-
President. The majority of the Progressives returned to the
Republican fold in 1916. But the rupture was not healed, and the
Democrats reelected Woodrow Wilson.



CHAPTER IX. THE AWAKENING

In the early days a ballot was simply a piece of paper with the
names of the candidates written or printed on it. As party
organizations became more ambitious, the party printed its own
ballots, and "scratching" was done by pasting gummed stickers,
with the names of the substitutes printed on them, over the
regular ballot, or by simply striking out a name and writing
another one in its place. It was customary to print the different
party tickets on different colored paper, so that the judges in
charge of the ballot boxes could tell how the men voted. When
later laws required all ballots to be printed on white paper and
of the same size, the parties used paper of different texture.
Election officials could then tell by the "feel" which ticket was
voted. Finally paper of the same color and quality was enjoined
by some States. But it was not until the State itself undertook
to print the ballots that uniformity was secured.

In the meantime the peddling of tickets was a regular occupation
on election day. Canvassers invaded homes and places of business,
and even surrounded the voting place. It was the custom in many
parts of the country for the voters to prepare the ballots before
reaching the voting place and carry them in the vest pocket, with
a margin showing. This was a sort of signal that the voter's mind
had been made up and that he should be let alone, yet even with
this signal showing, in hotly contested elections the voter ran a
noisy gauntlet of eager solicitors, harassing him on his way to
vote as cab drivers assail the traveler when he alights from the
train. This free and easy method, tolerable in sparsely settled
pioneer districts, failed miserably in the cities. It was
necessary to pass rigorous laws against vote buying and selling,
and to clear the polling-place of all partizan soliciting. Penal
provisions were enacted against intimidation, violence,
repeating, false swearing when challenged, ballot-box stuffing,
and the more patent forms of partizan vices. In order to stop the
practice of "repeating," New York early passed laws requiring
voters to be duly registered. But the early laws were defective,
and the rolls were easily padded. In most of the cities poll
lists were made by the party workers, and the name of each voter
was checked off as he voted. It was still impossible for the
voter to keep secret his ballot. The buyer of votes could tell
whether he got what he paid for; the employer, so disposed, could
bully those dependent on him into voting as he wished, and the
way was open to all manner of tricks in the printing of ballots
with misleading emblems, or with certain names omitted, or with a
mixture of candidates from various parties--tricks that were
later forbidden by law but were none the less common.

Rather suddenly a great change came over election day. In 1888
Kentucky adopted the Australian ballot for the city of
Louisville, and Massachusetts adopted it for all state and local
elections. The Massachusetts statute provided that before an
election each political party should certify its nominees to the
Secretary of the Commonwealth. The State then printed the
ballots. All the nominees of all the parties were printed on one
sheet. Each office was placed in a separate column, the
candidates in alphabetical order, with the names of the parties
following. Blank spaces were left for those who wished to vote
for others than the regular nominees. This form of ballot
prevented "voting straight" with a single mark. The voter, in the
seclusion of a booth at the polling-place, had to pick his
party's candidates from the numerous columns.

Indiana, in 1889, adopted a similar statute but the ballot had
certain modifications to suit the needs of party orthodoxy. Here
the columns represented parties, not offices. Each party had a
column. Each column was headed by the party name and its device,
so that those who could not read could vote for the Rooster or
the Eagle or the Fountain. There was a circle placed under the
device, and by making his mark in this circle the voter voted
straight.

Within eight years thirty-eight States and two Territories had
adopted the Australian or blanket ballot in some modified form.
It was but a step to the state control of the election machinery.
Some state officer, usually the Secretary of State, was
designated to see that the election laws were enforced. In New
York a State Commissioner of Elections was appointed. The
appointment of local inspectors and judges remained for a time in
the hands of the parties. But soon in several States even this
power was taken from them, and the trend now is towards
appointing all election officers by the central authority. These
officers also have complete charge of the registration of voters.
In some States, like New York, registration has become a rather
solemn procedure, requiring the answering of many questions and
the signing of the voter's name, all under the threat of perjury
if a wilful misrepresentation is made.

So passed out of the control of the party the preparation of the
ballot and the use of the ballot on election day. Innumerable
rules have been laid down by the State for the conduct of
elections. The distribution of the ballots, their custody before
election, the order of electional procedure, the counting of the
ballots, the making of returns, the custody of the ballot-boxes,
and all other necessary details, are regulated by law under
official state supervision. The parties are allowed watchers at
the polls, but these have no official standing.

If a Revolutionary Father could visit his old haunts on election
day, he would be astonished at the sober decorum. In his time
elections lasted three days, days filled with harangue, with
drinking, betting, raillery, and occasional encounters. Even
those whose memory goes back to the Civil War can contrast the
ballot peddling, the soliciting, the crowded noisy
polling-places, with the calm and quiet with which men deposit
their ballots today. For now every ballot is numbered and no one
is permitted to take a single copy from the room. Every voter
must prepare his ballot in the booth. And every polling-place is
an island of immunity in the sea of political excitement.

While the people were thus assuming control of the ballot, they
were proceeding to gain control of their legislatures. In 1890
Massachusetts enacted one of the first anti-lobby laws. It has
served as a model for many other States. It provided that the
sergeant-at-arms should keep dockets in which were enrolled the
names of all persons employed as counsel or agents before
legislative committees. Each counsel or agent was further
compelled to state the length of his engagement, the subjects or
bills for which he was employed, and the name and address of his
employer.

The first session after the passage of this law, many of the
professional lobbyists refused to enroll, and the most notorious
ones were seen no more in the State House. The regular counsel of
railroads, insurance companies, and other interests signed the
proper docket and appeared for their clients in open committee
meetings.

The law made it the duty of the Secretary of the Commonwealth to
report to the law officers of the State, for prosecution, all
those who failed to comply with the act. Sixty-seven such
delinquents were reported the first year. The Grand Jury refused
to indict them, but the number of recalcitrants has gradually
diminished.

The experience of Massachusetts is not unique. Other States
passed more or less rigorous anti-lobby laws, and today, in no
state Capitol, will the visitor see the disgusting sights that
were usual thirty years ago--arrogant and coarse professional
"agents" mingling on the floor of the legislature with members,
even suggesting procedure to presiding officers, and not
infrequently commandeering a majority. Such influences, where
they persist, have been driven under cover.

With the decline of the professional lobbyist came the rise of
the volunteer lobbyist. Important bills are now considered in
formal committee hearings which are well advertised so that
interested parties may be present. Publicity and information have
taken the place of secrecy in legislative procedure. The
gathering of expert testimony by special legislative commissions
of inquiry is now a frequent practice in respect to subjects of
wide social import, such as workmen's compensation, widows'
pensions, and factory conditions.

A number of States have resorted to the initiative and referendum
as applied to ordinary legislation. By means of this method a
small percentage of the voters, from eight to ten per cent, may
initiate proposals and impose upon the voters the function of
legislation. South Dakota, in 1898, made constitutional provision
for direct legislation. Utah followed in 1900, Oregon in 1902,
Nevada in 1904, Montana in 1906, and Oklahoma in 1907. East of
the Mississippi, several States have adopted a modified form of
the initiative and referendum. In Oregon, where this device of
direct government has been most assiduously applied, the voters
in 1908 voted upon nineteen different bills and constitutional
amendments; in 1910 the number increased to thirty-two; in 1912,
to thirty-seven; in 1914 it fell to twenty-nine. The vote cast
for these measures rarely exceeded eighty per cent of those
voting at the election and frequently fell below sixty.

The electorate that attempts to rid itself of the evils of the
state legislature by these heroic methods assumes a heavy
responsibility. When the burden of direct legislation is added to
the task of choosing from the long list of elective officers
which is placed before the voter at every local and state
election, it is not surprising that there should set in a
reaction in favor of simplified government. The mere separation
of state and local elections does not solve the problem. It
somewhat minimizes the chances of partizan influence over the
voter in local elections; but the voter is still confronted with
the long lists of candidates for elective offices. Ballots not
infrequently contain two hundred names, sometimes even three
hundred or more, covering candidates of four or five parties for
scores of offices. These blanket ballots are sometimes three feet
long. After an election in Chicago in 1916, one of the leading
dailies expressed sympathy "for the voter emerging from the
polling-booth, clutching a handful of papers, one of them about
half as large as a bed sheet." Probably most voters were able to
express a real preference among the national candidates. It is
almost equally certain that most voters were not able to express
a real preference among important local administrative officials.
A huge ballot, all printed over with names, supplemented by a
series of smaller ballots, can never be a manageable instrument
even for an electorate as intelligent as ours.

Simplification is the prophetic watchword in state government
today. For cities, the City Manager and the Commission have
offered salvation. A few officers only are elected and these are
held strictly responsible, sometimes under the constant threat of
the recall, for the entire administration. Over four hundred
cities have adopted the form of government by Commission. But
nothing has been done to simplify our state governments, which
are surrounded by a maze of heterogeneous and undirected boards
and authorities. Every time the legislature found itself
confronted by a new function to be cared for, it simply created a
new board. New York has a hodgepodge of over 116 such
authorities; Minnesota, 75; Illinois, 100. Iowa in 1913 and
Illinois and Minnesota in 1914, indeed, perfected elaborate
proposals for simplifying their state governments. But these
suggestions remain dormant. And the New York State Constitutional
Convention in 1915 prepared a new Constitution for the State,
with the same end in view, but their work was not accepted by the
people. It may be said, however, that in our attempt to rid
ourselves of boss rule we have swung through the arc of direct
government and are now on the returning curve toward
representative government, a more intensified representative
government that makes evasion of responsibility and duty
impossible by fixing it upon one or two men.



CHAPTER X. PARTY REFORM

The State, at first, had paid little attention to the party,
which was regarded as a purely voluntary aggregation of
like-minded citizens. Evidently the State could not dictate that
you should be a Democrat or a Republican or force you to be an
Independent. With the adoption of the Australian ballot, however,
came the legal recognition of the party; for as soon as the State
recognized the party's designated nominees in the preparation of
the official ballot, it recognized the party. It was then
discovered that, unless some restrictions were imposed, groups of
interested persons in the old parties would manage the
nominations of both to their mutual satisfaction. Thus a handful
of Democrats would visit Republican caucuses or primaries and a
handful of Republicans would return the favor to the Democrats.
In other words, the bosses of both parties would cooperate in
order to secure nominations satisfactory to themselves.
Massachusetts began the reform by defining a party as a group of
persons who had cast a certain percentage of the votes at the
preceding election. This definition has been widely accepted; and
the number of votes has been variously fixed at from two to
twenty-five per cent. Other States have followed the New York
plan of fixing definitely the number of voters necessary to form
a party. In New York no fewer than 10,000 voters can secure
recognition as a state party, exception being made in favor of
municipal or purely local parties. But merely fixing the
numerical minimum of the party was not enough. The State took
another step forward in depriving the manipulator of his liberty
when it undertook to determine who was entitled to membership in
the party and privileged to take part in its nominations and
other party procedure. Otherwise the virile minority in each
party would control both the membership and the nominations.

An Oregon statute declares: "Every political party and every
volunteer political organization has the same right to be
protected from the interference of persons who are not identified
with it, as its known and publicly avowed members, that the
government of the State has to protect itself from the
interference of persons who are not known and registered as its
electors. It is as great a wrong to the people, as well as to
members of a political party, for anyone who is not known to be
one of its members to vote or take any part at any election, or
other proceedings of such political party, as it is for one who
is not a qualified and registered elector to vote at any state
election or to take part in the business of the State." It is a
far reach from the democratic laissez faire of Jackson's day to
this state dogmatism which threatens the independent or detached
voter with ultimate extinction.

A variety of methods have been adopted for initiating the citizen
into party membership. In the Southern States, where the dual
party system does not exist, the legislature has left the matter
in the hands of the duly appointed party officials. They can,
with canonical rigor, determine the party standing of voters at
the primaries. But where there is party competition, such a
generous endowment of power would be dangerous.

Many States permit the voter to make his declaration of party
allegiance when he goes to the primary. He asks for the ticket of
the party whose nominees he wishes to help select. He is then
handed the party's ballot, which he marks and places in the
ballot-box of that party. Now, if he is challenged, he must
declare upon oath that he is a member of that party, that he has
generally supported its tickets and its principles, and that at
the coming election he intends to support at least a majority of
its nominees. In this method little freedom is left to the voter
who wishes to participate as an independent both in the primaries
and in the general election.

The New York plan is more rigorous. Here, in all cities, the
voter enrolls his name on his party's lists when he goes to
register for the coming election. He receives a ballot upon which
are the following words: "I am in general sympathy with the
principles of the party which I have designated by my mark
hereunder; it is my intention to support generally at the next
general election, state and national, the nominees of such party
for state and national offices; and I have not enrolled with or
participated in any primary election or convention of any other
party since the first day of last year." On this enrollment blank
he indicates the party of his choice, and the election officials
deposit all the ballots, after sealing them in envelopes, in a
special box. At a time designated by law, these seals are broken
and the party enrollment is compiled from them. These party
enrollment books are public records. Everyone who cares may
consult the lists. The advantages of secrecy--such as they
are--are thus not secured.

It remained for Wisconsin, the experimenting State, to find a way
of insuring secrecy. Here, when the voter goes to the primary, he
is handed a large ballot, upon which all the party nominations
are printed. The different party tickets are separated by
perforations, so that the voter simply tears out the party ticket
he wishes to vote, marks it, and puts it in the box. The rejected
tickets he deposits in a large waste basket provided for the
discards.

While the party was being fenced in by legal definition, its
machinery, the intricate hierarchy of committees, was subjected
to state scrutiny with the avowed object of ridding the party of
ring rule. The State Central Committee is the key to the
situation. To democratize this committee is a task that has
severely tested the ingenuity of the State, for the inventive
capacity of the professional politician is prodigious. The
devices to circumvent the politician are so numerous and various
that only a few types can be selected to illustrate how the State
is carrying out its determination. Illinois has provided perhaps
the most democratic method. In each congressional district, the
voters, at the regular party primaries, choose the member of the
state committee for the district, who serves for a term of two
years. The law says that "no other person or persons whomsoever"
than those so chosen by the voters shall serve on the committee,
so that members by courtesy or by proxy, who might represent the
boss, are apparently shut off. The law stipulates the time within
which the committee must meet and organize. Under this plan, if
the ring controls the committee, the fault lies wholly with the
majority of the party; it is a self-imposed thraldom.

Iowa likewise stipulates that the Central Committee shall be
composed of one member from each congressional district. But the
members are chosen in a state convention, organized under strict
and minute regulations imposed by law. It permits considerable
freedom to the committee, however, stating that it "may organize
at pleasure for political work as is usual and customary with
such committees."

In Wisconsin another plan was adopted in 1907. Here the
candidates for the various state offices and for both branches of
the legislature and the senators whose terms have not expired
meet in the state capital at noon on a day specified by law and
elect by ballot a central committee consisting of at least two
members from each congressional district. A chairman is chosen in
the same manner.

Most States, however, leave some leeway in the choice of the
state committee, permitting their election usually by the regular
primaries but controlling their action in many details. The
lesser committees--county, city, district, judicial, senatorial,
congressional, and others--are even more rigorously controlled by
law.

So the issuing of the party platform, the principles on which it
must stand or fall, has been touched by this process of
ossification. Few States retain the state convention in its
original vigor. In all States where primaries are held for state
nominations, the emasculated and subdued convention is permitted
to write the party platform. But not so in some States. Wisconsin
permits the candidates and the hold-over members of the Senate,
assembled according to law in a state meeting, to issue the
platform. In other States, the Central Committee and the various
candidates for state office form a party council and frame the
platform. Oregon, in 1901, tried a novel method of providing
platforms by referendum. But the courts declared the law
unconstitutional. So Oregon now permits each candidate to write
his own platform in not over one hundred words and file it with
his nominating petition, and to present a statement of not over
twelve words to be printed on the ballot.

The convention system provided many opportunities for the
manipulator and was inherently imperfect for nominating more than
one or two candidates for office. It has survived as the method
of nominating candidates for President of the United States
because it is adapted to the wide geographical range of the
nation and because in the national convention only a President
and a Vice-President are nominated. In state and county
conventions, where often candidates for a dozen or more offices
are to be nominated, it was often subject to demoralizing
bartering.

The larger the number of nominations to be made, the more
complete was the jobbery, and this was the death warrant of the
local convention. These evils were recognized as early as June
20, 1860, when the Republican county convention of Crawford
County, Pennsylvania, adopted the following resolutions:

"Whereas, in nominating candidates for the several county
offices, it clearly is, or ought to be, the object to arrive as
nearly as possible at the wishes of the majority, or at least a
plurality of the Republican voters; and

Whereas the present system of nominating by delegates, who
virtually represent territory rather than votes, and who almost
necessarily are wholly unacquainted with the wishes and feelings
of their constituents in regard to various candidates for office,
is undemocratic, because the people have no voice in it, and
objectionable, because men are often placed in nomination because
of their location who are decidedly unpopular, even in their own
districts, and because it affords too great an opportunity for
scheming and designing men to accomplish their own purposes;
therefore

Resolved, that we are in favor of submitting nominations directly
to the people--the Republican voters--and that delegate
conventions for nominating county officers be abolished, and we
hereby request and instruct the county committee to issue their
call in 1861, in accordance with the spirit of this resolution."

Upon the basis of this indictment of the county convention
system, the Republican voters of Crawford County, a rural
community, whose largest town is Meadville, the county seat,
proceeded to nominate their candidates by direct vote, under
rules prepared by the county committee. These rules have been but
slightly changed. The informality of a hat or open table drawer
has been replaced by an official ballotbox, and an official
ballot has taken the place of the tickets furnished by each
candidate.

The "Crawford County plan," as it was generally called, was
adopted by various localities in many States. In 1866 California
and New York enacted laws to protect primaries and nominating
caucuses from fraud. In 1871 Ohio and Pennsylvania enacted
similar laws, followed by Missouri in 1875 and New Jersey in
1878. By 1890 over a dozen States had passed laws attempting to
eliminate the grosser frauds attendant upon making nominations.
In many instances it was made optional with the party whether the
direct plan should supersede the delegate plan. Only in certain
cities, however, was the primary made mandatory in these States.
By far the larger areas retained the convention.

There is noticeable in these years a gradual increase in the
amount of legislation concerning the nominating machinery--
prescribing the days and hours for holding elections of
delegates, the size of the polling-place, the nature of the
ballotbox, the poll-list, who might participate in the choice of
delegates, how the returns were to be made, and so on. By the
time, then, that the Australian ballot came, with its profound
changes, nearly all the States had attempted to remove the
glaring abuses of the nominating system; and several of them
officially recognized the direct primary. The State was reluctant
to abolish the convention system entirely; and the Crawford
County plan long remained merely optional. But in 1901 Minnesota
enacted a state-wide, mandatory primary law. Mississippi followed
in 1902, Wisconsin in 1903, and Oregon in 1904. This movement has
swept the country.

Few States retain the nominating convention, and where it remains
it is shackled by legal restrictions. The boss, however, has
devised adequate means for controlling primaries, and a return to
a modified convention system is being earnestly discussed in many
States to circumvent the further ingenuity of the boss. A further
step towards the state control of parties was taken when laws
began to busy themselves with the conduct of the campaign.
Corrupt Practices Acts began to assume bulk in the early
nineties, to limit the expenditure of candidates, and to
enumerate the objects for which campaign committees might
legitimately spend money. These are usually personal traveling
expenses of the candidates, rental of rooms for committees and
halls for meetings, payment of musicians and speakers and their
traveling expenses, printing campaign material, postage for
distribution of letters, newspapers and printed matter, telephone
and telegraph charges, political advertising, employing
challengers at the polls, necessary clerk hire, and conveyances
for bringing aged or infirm voters to the polls. The maximum
amount that can be spent by candidates is fixed, and they are
required to make under oath a detailed statement of their
expenses in both primary and general elections. The various
committees, also, must make detailed reports of the funds they
handle, the amount, the contributors, and the expenditures.
Corporations are forbidden to contribute, and the amount that
candidates themselves may give is limited in many States. These
exactions are reinforced by stringent laws against bribery.
Persons found guilty of either receiving or soliciting a bribe
are generally disfranchised or declared ineligible for public
office for a term of years. Illinois, for the second offense,
forever disfranchises.

It is not surprising that these restrictions have led the State
to face the question whether it should not itself bear some of
the expenses of the campaign. It has, of course, already assumed
an enormous burden formerly borne entirely by the party. The cost
of primary and general elections nowadays is tremendous. A few
Western States print a campaign pamphlet and distribute it to
every voter. The pamphlet contains usually the photographs of the
candidates, a brief biography, and a statement of principles.

These are the principal encroachments made by the Government upon
the autonomy of the party. The details are endless. The election
laws of New York fill 330 printed pages. It is little wonder that
American parties are beginning to study the organization of
European parties, such as the labor parties and the social
democratic parties, which have enlisted a rather fervent party
fealty. These are propagandist parties and require to be active
all the year round. So they demand annual dues of their members
and have permanent salaried officials and official party organs.
Such a permanent organization was suggested for the National
Progressive party. But the early disintegration of the party made
impossible what would have been an interesting experiment. After
the election of 1916, Governor Whitman of New York suggested that
the Republican party choose a manager and pay him $10,000 a year
and have a lien on all his time and energy. The plan was widely
discussed and its severest critics were the politicians who would
suffer from it. The wide-spread comment with which it was
received revealed the change that has come over the popular idea
of a political party since the State began forty years ago to
bring the party under its control.

But flexibility is absolutely essential to a party system that
adequately serves a growing democracy. And under a two-party
system, as ours is probably bound to remain, the independent
voter usually holds the balance of power. He may be merely a
disgruntled voter seeking for revenge, or an overpleased voter
seeking to maintain a profitable status quo, or he may belong to
that class of super-citizens from which mugwumps arise. In any
case, the majorities at elections are usually determined by him.
And party orthodoxy made by the State is almost as distasteful to
him as the rigor of the boss. He relishes neither the one nor the
other.

In the larger cities the citizens' tickets and fusion movements
are types of independent activities. In some cities they are
merely temporary associations, formed for a single, thorough
housecleaning. The Philadelphia Committee of One Hundred, which
was organized in 1880 to fight the Gas Ring, is an example. It
issued a Declaration of Principles, demanding the promotion of
public service rather than private greed, and the prosecution of
"those who have been guilty of election frauds, maladministration
of office, or misappropriation of public funds." Announcing that
it would endorse only candidates who signed this declaration, the
committee supported the Democratic candidates, and nominated for
Receiver of Taxes a candidate of its own, who became also the
Democratic nominee when the regular Democratic candidate
withdrew. Philadelphia was overwhelmingly Republican. But the
committee's aid was powerful enough to elect the Democratic
candidate for mayor by 6000 majority and the independent
candidate for Receiver of Taxes by 20,000. This gave the
Committee access to the records of the doings of the Gas Ring. In
1884, however, the candidate which it endorsed was defeated, and
it disbanded.

Similar in experience was the famous New York Committee of
Seventy, organized in 1894 after Dr. Parkhurst's lurid
disclosures of police connivance with every degrading vice. A
call was issued by thirty-three well-known citizens for a
non-partizan mass meeting, and at this meeting a committee of
seventy was appointed "with full power to confer with other
anti-Tammany organizations, and to take such actions as may be
necessary to further the objects of this meeting as set forth in
the call therefor, and the address adopted by this meeting." The
committee adopted a platform, appointed an executive and a
finance committee, and nominated a full ticket, distributing the
candidates among both parties. All other anti-Tammany
organizations endorsed this ticket, and it was elected by large
majorities. The committee dissolved after having secured certain
charter amendments for the city and seeing its roster of officers
inaugurated.

The Municipal Voters' League of Chicago is an important example
of the permanent type of citizens' organization. The league is
composed of voters in every ward, who, acting through committees
and alert officers, scrutinize every candidate for city office
from the Mayor down. It does not aim to nominate a ticket of its
own, but to exercise such vigilance, enforced by so effective an
organization and such wide-reaching publicity, that the various
parties will, of their own volition, nominate men whom the league
can endorse. By thus putting on the hydraulic pressure of
organized public opinion, it has had a considerable influence on
the parties and a very stimulating effect on the citizenry.

Finally, there has developed in recent years the fusion movement,
whereby the opponents of boss rule in all parties unite and back
an independent or municipal ticket. The election of Mayor Mitchel
of New York in 1913 was thus accomplished. In Milwaukee, a fusion
has been successful against the Socialists. And in many lesser
cities this has brought at least temporary relief from the
oppression of the local oligarchy.



CHAPTER XI. THE EXPERT AT LAST

The administrative weakness of a democracy, namely, the tendency
towards a government by job-hunters, was disclosed even in the
early days of the United States, when the official machinery was
simple and the number of offices few. Washington at once foresaw
both the difficulties and the duties that the appointing power
imposed. Soon after his inauguration he wrote to Rutledge: "I
anticipate that one of the most difficult and delicate parts of
the duty of any office will be that which relates to nominations
for appointments." And he was most scrupulous and painstaking in
his appointments. Fitness for duty was paramount with him, though
he recognized geographical necessity and distributed the offices
with that precision which characterized all his acts.

John Adams made very few appointments. After his term had
expired, he wrote: "Washington appointed a multitude of Democrats
and Jacobins of the deepest die. I have been more cautious in
this respect."

The test of partizan loyalty, however, was not applied generally
until after the election of Jefferson. The ludicrous
apprehensions of the Federalists as to what would follow upon his
election were not allayed by his declared intentions. "I have
given," he wrote to Monroe, "and will give only to Republicans
under existing circumstances." Jefferson was too good a
politician to overlook his opportunity to annihilate the
Federalists. He hoped to absorb them in his own party, "to unite
the names of Federalists and Republicans." Moderate Federalists,
who possessed sufficient gifts of grace for conversion, he
sedulously nursed. But he removed all officers for whose removal
any special reason could be discovered. The "midnight
appointments" of John Adams he refused to acknowledge, and he
paid no heed to John Marshall's dicta in Marbury versus Madison.
He was zealous in discovering plausible excuses for making
vacancies. The New York Evening Post described him as "gazing
round, with wild anxiety furiously inquiring, 'how are vacancies
to be obtained?'" Directly and indirectly, Jefferson effected,
during his first term, 164 changes in the offices at his
disposal, a large number for those days. This he did so craftily,
with such delicate regard for geographical sensitiveness and with
such a nice balance between fitness for office and the desire for
office, that by the end of his second term he had not only
consolidated our first disciplined and eager political party, but
had quieted the storm against his policy of partizan
proscription.

During the long regime of the Jeffersonian Republicans there were
three significant movements. In January, 1811, Nathaniel Macon
introduced his amendment to the Constitution providing that no
member of Congress should receive a civil appointment "under the
authority of the United States until the expiration of the
presidential term in which such person shall have served as
senator or representative." An amendment was offered by Josiah
Quincy, making ineligible to appointment the relations by blood
or marriage of any senator or representative. Nepotism was
considered the curse of the civil service, and for twenty years
similar amendments were discussed at almost every session of
Congress. John Quincy Adams said that half of the members wanted
office, and the other half wanted office for their relatives.

In 1820 the Four Years' Act substituted a four-year tenure of
office, in place of a term at the pleasure of the President, for
most of the federal appointments. The principal argument urged in
favor of the law was that unsatisfactory civil servants could
easily be dropped without reflection on their character.
Defalcations had been discovered to the amount of nearly a
million dollars, due mainly to carelessness and gross
inefficiency. It was further argued that any efficient incumbent
need not be disquieted, for he would be reappointed. The law,
however, fulfilled Jefferson's prophecy: it kept "in constant
excitement all the hungry cormorants for office."

What Jefferson began, Jackson consummated. The stage was now set
for Democracy. Public office had been marshaled as a force in
party maneuver. In his first annual message, Jackson announced
his philosophy:

"There are perhaps few men who can for any great length of time
enjoy office and power without being more or less under the
influence of feelings unfavorable to the faithful discharge of
their public duties .... Office is considered as a species of
property, and government rather as a means of promoting
individual interests than as an instrument created solely for the
service of the people. Corruption in some, and in others a
perversion of correct feelings and principles, divert government
from its legitimate ends and make it an engine for the support of
the few at the expense of the many. The duties of all public
offices are, or at least admit of being made, so plain, so simple
that men of intelligence may readily qualify themselves for their
performance . . . . In a country where offices are created solely
for the benefit of the people, no one man has any more intrinsic
right to official station than another."

The Senate refused Jackson's request for an extension of the Four
Years' law to cover all positions in the civil service. It also
refused to confirm some of his appointments, notably that of Van
Buren as minister to Great Britain. The debate upon this
appointment gave the spoilsman an epigram. Clay with directness
pointed to Van Buren as the introducer "of the odious system of
proscription for the exercise of the elective franchise in the
government of the United States." He continued: "I understand it
is the system on which the party in his own State, of which he is
the reputed head, constantly acts. He was among the first of the
secretaries to apply that system to the dismission of clerks of
his department . . . known to me to be highly meritorious . . .
It is a detestable system."

And Webster thundered: "I pronounce my rebuke as solemnly and as
decisively as I can upon this first instance in which an American
minister has been sent abroad as the representative of his party
and not as the representative of his country."

To these and other challenges, Senator Marcy of New York made his
well-remembered retort that "the politicians of the United States
are not so fastidious . . . . They see nothing wrong in the rule
that to the victor belong the spoils of the enemy."

Jackson, with all his bluster and the noise of his followers,
made his proscriptions relatively fewer than those of Jefferson.
He removed only 252 of about 612 presidential appointees.* It
should, however, be remembered that those who were not removed
had assured Jackson's agents of their loyalty to the new
Democracy.

* This does not include deputy postmasters, who numbered about
8000 and were not placed in the presidential list until 1836.


If Jackson did not inaugurate the spoils system, he at least gave
it a mission. It was to save the country from the curse of
officialdom. His successor , Van Buren, brought the system to a
perfection that only the experienced politician could achieve.
Van Buren required of all appointees partizan service; and his
own nomination, at Baltimore, was made a foregone conclusion by
the host of federal job-holders who were delegates. Van Buren
simply introduced at Washington the methods of the Albany
Regency.

The Whigs blustered bravely against this proscription. But their
own President, General Harrison, "Old Tippecanoe," was helpless
against the saturnalia of office-seekers that engulfed him.
Harrison, when he came to power, removed about one-half of the
officials in the service. And, although the partizan color of the
President changed with Harrison's death, after a few weeks in
office,--Tyler was merely a Whig of convenience--there was no
change in the President's attitude towards the spoils system.

Presidential inaugurations became orgies of office-seekers, and
the first weeks of every new term were given over to distributing
the jobs, ordinary business having to wait. President Polk, who
removed the usual quota, is complimented by Webster for making
"rather good selections from his own friends." The practice, now
firmly established, was continued by Taylor, Pierce, and
Buchanan.

Lincoln found himself surrounded by circumstances that made
caution necessary in every appointment. His party was new and
composed of many diverse elements. He had to transform their
jealousies into enthusiasm, for the approach of civil war
demanded supreme loyalty and unity of action. To this greater
cause of saving the Union he bent every effort and used every
instrumentality at his command. No one before him had made so
complete a change in the official personnel of the capital as the
change which he was constrained to make. No one before him or
since used the appointing power with such consummate skill or
displayed such rare tact and knowledge of human nature in seeking
the advice of those who deemed their advice valuable. The war
greatly increased the number of appointments, and it also imposed
obligations that made merit sometimes a secondary consideration.
With the statesman's vision, Lincoln recognized both the use and
the abuse of the patronage system. He declined to gratify the
office-seekers who thronged the capital at the beginning of his
second term; and they returned home disappointed. The twenty
years following the Civil War were years of agitation for reform.
People were at last recognizing the folly of using the
multiplying public offices for party spoils. The quarrel between
Congress and President Johnson over removals, and the Tenure of
Office Act, focused popular attention on the constitutional
question of appointment and removal, and the recklessness of the
political manager during Grant's two terms disgusted the
thoughtful citizen.

The first attempts to apply efficiency to the civil service had
been made when pass examinations were used for sifting candidates
for clerkships in the Treasury Department in 1853, when such
tests were prescribed by law for the lowest grade of clerkships.
The head of the department was given complete control over the
examinations, and they were not exacting. In 1864 Senator Sumner
introduced a bill "to provide for the greater efficiency of the
civil service." It was considered chimerical and dropped.

Meanwhile, a steadfast and able champion of reform appeared in
the House, Thomas A. Jenckes, a prominent lawyer of Rhode Island.
A bill which he introduced in December, 1865, received no
hearing. But in the following year a select joint committee was
charged to examine the whole question of appointments,
dismissals, and patronage. Mr. Jenckes presented an elaborate
report in May, 1868, explaining the civil service of other
countries. This report, which is the corner stone of American
civil service reform, provided the material for congressional
debate and threw the whole subject into the public arena. Jenckes
in the House and Carl Schurz in the Senate saw to it that ardent
and convincing defense of reform was not wanting. In compliance
with President Grant's request for a law to "govern not the
tenure, but the manner of making all appointments," a rider was
attached to the appropriation bill in 1870, asking the President
"to prescribe such rules and regulations" as he saw fit, and "to
employ suitable persons to conduct" inquiries into the best
method for admitting persons into the civil service. A commission
of which George William Curtis was chairman made recommendations,
but they were not adopted and Curtis resigned. The New York Civil
Service Reform Association was organized in 1877; and the
National League, organized in 1881, soon had flourishing branches
in most of the large cities. The battle was largely between the
President and Congress. Each succeeding President signified his
adherence to reform, but neutralized his words by sanctioning
vast changes in the service. Finally, under circumstances already
described, on January 16, 1883, the Civil Service Act was passed.

This law had a stimulating effect upon state and municipal civil
service. New York passed a law the same year, patterned after the
federal act. Massachusetts followed in 1884, and within a few
years many of the States had adopted some sort of civil service
reform, and the large cities were experimenting with the merit
system. It was not, however, until the rapid expansion of the
functions of government and the consequent transformation in the
nature of public duties that civil service reform made notable
headway. When the Government assumed the duties of health
officer, forester, statistician, and numerous other highly
specialized functions, the presence of the scientific expert
became imperative; and vast undertakings, like the building of
the Panama Canal and the enormous irrigation projects of the
West, could not be entrusted to the spoilsman and his minions.

The war has accustomed us to the commandeering of utilities, of
science, and of skill upon a colossal scale. From this height of
public devotion it is improbable that we shall decline, after the
national peril has passed, into the depths of administrative
incompetency which our Republic, and all its parts, occupied for
so many years. The need for an efficient and highly complex State
has been driven home to the consciousness of the average citizen.
And this foretokens the permanent enlistment of talent in the
public service to the end that democracy may provide that
effective nationalism imposed by the new era of world
competition.



BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

There is no collected material of the literature of exposure. It
is found in the official reports of investigating committees;
such as the Lexow, Mazet, and Fassett committees in New York, and
the report on campaign contributions by the Senate Committee on
Privileges and Elections (1913). The muckraker has scattered such
indiscriminate charges that great caution is necessary to
discover the truth. Only testimony taken under oath can be relied
upon. And for local exposes the official court records must be
sought.

The annual proceedings of the National Municipal League contain a
great deal of useful material on municipal politics. The reports
of local organizations, such as the New York Bureau of Municipal
Research and the Pittsburgh Voters' League, are invaluable, as
are the reports of occasional bodies, like the Philadelphia
Committee of Fifty.

Personal touches can be gleaned from the autobiographies of such
public men as Platt, Foraker, Weed, La Follette, and in such
biographies as Croly's "M. A. Hanna."

On Municipal Conditions:

W. B. Munro, "The Government of American Cities" (1913). An
authoritative and concise account of the development of American
city government. Chapter VII deals with municipal politics.

J. J. Hamilton, "Dethronement of the City Boss" (1910). A
description of the operation of commission government.

E. S. Bradford, "Commission Government in American Cities"
(1911). A careful study of the commission plan.

H. Bruere, "New City Government" (1912). An interesting account
of the new municipal regime.

Lincoln Steffens, "The Shame of the Cities" and "The Struggle for
Self-Government" (1906). The Prince of the Muckrakers'
contribution to the literature of awakening.

On State Conditions:

There is an oppressive barrenness of material on this subject.

P. S. Reinsch, "American Legislatures and Legislative Methods "
(1907). A brilliant exposition of the legislatures' activities.

E. L. Godkin, "Unforeseen Tendencies in Democracy" contains a
thoughtful essay on "The Decline of Legislatures."

On Political Parties and Machines:

M. Ostrogorski, "Democracy and the Organization of Political
Parties," 2 vols. (1902). The second volume contains a
comprehensive and able survey of the American party system. It
has been abridged into a single volume edition called "Democracy
and the Party System in the United States" (1910).

James Bryce, "The American Commonwealth," 2 vols. Volume II
contains a noteworthy account of our political system.

Jesse Macy, "Party Organization and Machinery" (1912). A succinct
account of party machinery.

J. A. Woodburn, "Political Parties and Party Problems "(1906). A
sane account of our political task.

P. O. Ray, "An Introduction to Political Parties and Practical
Politics " (1913). Valuable for its copious references to current
literature on political subjects.

Theodore Roosevelt, "Essays on Practical Politics" (1888).
Vigorous description of machine methods.

G. M. Gregory, "The Corrupt Use of Money in Politics and Laws for
its Prevention" (1893). Written before the later exposes, it
nevertheless gives a clear view of the problem.

W. M. Ivins, "Machine Politics" (1897). In New York City--by a
keen observer.

George Vickers, "The Fall of Bossism" (1883). On the overthrow of
the Philadelphia Gas Ring.

Gustavus Myers, "History of Tammany Hall" (1901; revised 1917).
The best book on the subject.

E. C. Griffith, "The Ripe and Development of the Gerrymander"
(1907).

Historical:

H. J. Ford, "Rise and Growth of American Politics" (1898). One of
the earliest and one of the best accounts of the development of
American politics.

Alexander Johnston and J. A. Woodburn, "American Political
History," 2 vols. (1905). A brilliant recital of American party
history. The most satisfactory book on the subject.

W. M. Sloane, "Party Government in the United States" (1914). A
concise and convenient recital. Brings our party history to date.

J. B. McMaster, "With the Fathers" (1896). A volume of delightful
historical essays, including one on "The Political Depravity of
the Fathers."

On Nominations:

F. W. Dallinger, "Nominations for Elective Office in the United
States" (1897). The most thorough work on the subject, describing
the development of our nominating systems.

C. E. Merriam, "Primary Elections" (1908). A concise description
of the primary and its history.

R. S. Childs, "Short Ballot Principles" (1911). A splendid
account by the father of the short ballot movement.

C. E. Meyer, "Nominating Systems" (1902). Good on the caucus.

On the Presidency:

J. B. Bishop, "Our Political Drama" (1904). A readable account of
national conventions and presidential campaigns.

A. K. McClure, "Our Presidents and How We Make Them "(1903).

Edward Stanwood, "A History of the Presidency" (1898) . Gives
party platforms and describes each presidential campaign.

On Congress:

G. H. Haynes, "The Election of United States Senators" (1906).

H. J. Ford, "The Cost of Our National Government" (1910). A fine
account of congressional bad housekeeping.

MARY C. Follett, "The Speaker of the House of Representatives"
(1896).

Woodrow Wilson, "Congressional Government" (1885). Most
interesting reading in the light of the Wilson Administration.

L. G. McConachie, "Congressional Committees" (1898).

On Special Topics:

C. R. Fish, "Civil Service and the Patronage" (1905). The best
work on the subject.

J. D. Barnett, "The Operation of the Initiative, Referendum, and
Recall in Oregon" (1915). A helpful, intensive study of these
important questions.

E. P. Oberholtzer, The Referendum in America (1912). The most
satisfactory and comprehensive work on the subject. Also
discusses the initiative.

J. R. Commons, "Proportional Representation" (1907). The standard
American book on the subject.

R. C. Brooks, "Corruption in American Politics and Life "(1910).
A survey of our political pathology.










THIS BOOK, VOLUME 43 IN THE CHRONICLES OF AMERICA SERIES, ALLEN
JOHNSON, EDITOR, WAS DONATED TO PROJECT GUTENBERG BY THE JAMES
J. KELLY LIBRARY OF ST. GREGORY'S UNIVERSITY; THANKS TO ALEV AKMAN.





THE BOSS AND THE MACHINE, A CHRONICLE OF THE POLITICIANS
AND PARTY ORGANIZATION

BY SAMUEL P. ORTH




CONTENTS

I. THE RISE OF THE PARTY
II. THE RISE OF THE MACHINE
III. THE TIDE OF MATERIALISM
IV. THE POLITICIAN AND THE CITY
V. TAMMANY HALL
VI. LESSER OLIGARCHIES
VII. LEGISLATIVE OMNIPOTENCE
VIII. THE NATIONAL HIERARCHY
IX. THE AWAKENING
X. PARTY REFORM
XI. THE EXPERT AT LAST

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

THE BOSS AND THE MACHINE

CHAPTER I. THE RISE OF THE PARTY

The party system is an essential instrument of Democracy.
Wherever government rests upon the popular will, there the party
is the organ of expression and the agency of the ultimate power.
The party is, moreover, a forerunner of Democracy, for parties
have everywhere preceded free government. Long before Democracy
as now understood was anywhere established, long before the
American colonies became the United States, England was divided
between Tory and Whig. And it was only after centuries of bitter
political strife, during which a change of ministry would not
infrequently be accompanied by bloodshed or voluntary exile, that
England finally emerged with a government deriving its powers
from the consent of the governed.

The functions of the party, both as a forerunner and as a
necessary organ of Democracy, are well exemplified in American
experience. Before the Revolution, Tory and Whig were party names
used in the colonies to designate in a rough way two ideals of
political doctrine. The Tories believed in the supremacy of the
Executive, or the King; the Whigs in the supremacy of Parliament.
The Tories, by their rigorous and ruthless acts giving effect to
the will of an un-English King, soon drove the Whigs in the
colonies to revolt, and by the time of the Stamp Act (1765) a
well-knit party of colonial patriots was organized through
committees of correspondence and under the stimulus of local
clubs called "Sons of Liberty." Within a few years, these
patriots became the Revolutionists, and the Tories became the
Loyalists. As always happens in a successful revolution, the
party of opposition vanished, and when the peace of 1783 finally
put the stamp of reality upon the Declaration of 1776, the
patriot party had won its cause and had served its day.

Immediately thereafter a new issue, and a very significant one,
began to divide the thought of the people. The Articles of
Confederation, adopted as a form of government by the States
during a lull in the nationalistic fervor, had utterly failed to
perform the functions of a national government. Financially the
Confederation was a beggar at the doors of the States;
commercially it was impotent; politically it was bankrupt. The
new issue was the formation of a national government that should
in reality represent a federal nation, not a collection of touchy
States. Washington in his farewell letter to the American people
at the close of the war (1783) urged four considerations: a
strong central government, the payment of the national debt, a
well-organized militia, and the surrender by each State of
certain local privileges for the good of the whole. His "legacy,"
as this letter came to be called, thus bequeathed to us
Nationalism, fortified on the one hand by Honor and on the other
by Preparedness.

The Confederation floundered in the slough of inadequacy for
several years, however, before the people were sufficiently
impressed with the necessity of a federal government. When,
finally, through the adroit maneuver of Alexander Hamilton and
James Madison, the Constitutional Convention was called in 1787,
the people were in a somewhat chastened mood, and delegates were
sent to the Convention from all the States except Rhode Island.

No sooner had the delegates convened and chosen George Washington
as presiding officer, than the two opposing sides of opinion were
revealed, the nationalist and the particularist, represented by
the Federalists and the Anti-Federalists, as they later termed
themselves. The Convention, however, was formed of the
conservative leaders of the States, and its completed work
contained in a large measure, in spite of the great compromises,
the ideas of the Federalists. This achievement was made possible
by the absence from the Convention of the two types of men who
were to prove the greatest enemy of the new document when it was
presented for popular approval, namely, the office-holder or
politician, who feared that the establishment of a central
government would deprive him of his influence, and the popular
demagogue, who viewed with suspicion all evidence of organized
authority. It was these two types, joined by a third--the
conscientious objector--who formed the AntiFederalist party to
oppose the adoption of the new Constitution. Had this opposition
been well-organized, it could unquestionably have defeated the
Constitution, even against its brilliant protagonists, Hamilton,
Madison, Jay, and a score of other masterly men.

The unanimous choice of Washington for President gave the new
Government a non-partizan initiation. In every way Washington
attempted to foster the spirit of an undivided household. He
warned his countrymen against partizanship and sinister political
societies. But he called around his council board talents which
represented incompatible ideals of government. Thomas Jefferson,
the first Secretary of State, and Alexander Hamilton, the first
Secretary of the Treasury, might for a time unite their energies
under the wise chieftainship of Washington, but their political
principles could never be merged. And when, finally, Jefferson
resigned, he became forthwith the leader of the opposition--not
to Washington, but to Federalism as interpreted by Hamilton, John
Adams, and Jay.

The name Anti-Federalist lost its aptness after the inauguration
of the Government. Jefferson and his school were not opposed to a
federal government. They were opposed only to its pretensions, to
its assumption of centralized power. Their deep faith in popular
control is revealed in the name they assumed,
Democratic-Republican. They were eager to limit the federal power
to the glorification of the States; the Federalists were
ambitious to expand the federal power at the expense of localism.
This is what Jefferson meant when he wrote to Washington as early
as 1792, "The Republican party wish to preserve the Government in
its present form." Now this is a very definite and fundamental
distinction. It involves the political difference between
government by the people and government by the representatives of
the people, and the practical difference between a government by
law and a government by mass-meeting.

Jefferson was a master organizer. At letter-writing, the one
means of communication in those days, he was a Hercules. His pen
never wearied. He soon had a compact party. It included not only
most of the Anti-Federalists, but the small politicians, the
tradesmen and artisans, who had worked themselves into a
ridiculous frenzy over the French Revolution and who despised
Washington for his noble neutrality. But more than these,
Jefferson won over a number of distinguished men who had worked
for the adoption of the Constitution, the ablest of whom was
James Madison, often called "the Father of the Constitution."

The Jeffersonians, thus representing largely the debtor and
farmer class, led by men of conspicuous abilities, proceeded to
batter down the prestige of the Federalists. They declared
themselves opposed to large expenditures of public funds, to
eager exploitation of government ventures, to the Bank, and to
the Navy, which they termed "the great beast with the great
belly." The Federalists included the commercial and creditor
class and that fine element in American life composed of leading
families with whom domination was an instinct, all led,
fortunately, by a few idealists of rare intellectual attainments.
And, with the political stupidity often characteristic of their
class, they stumbled from blunder to blunder. In 1800 Thomas
Jefferson, who adroitly coined the mistakes of his opponents into
political currency for himself, was elected President. He had
received no more electoral votes than Aaron Burr, that mysterious
character in our early politics, but the election was decided by
the House of Representatives, where, after seven days' balloting,
several Federalists, choosing what to them was the lesser of two
evils, cast the deciding votes for Jefferson. When the
Jeffersonians came to power, they no longer opposed federal
pretensions; they now, by one of those strange veerings often
found in American politics, began to give a liberal
interpretation to the Constitution, while the Federalists with
equal inconsistency became strict constructionists. Even
Jefferson was ready to sacrifice his theory of strict
construction in order to acquire the province of Louisiana.

The Jeffersonians now made several concessions to the
manufacturers, and with their support linked to that of the
agriculturists Jeffersonian democracy flourished without any
potent opposition. The second war with England lent it a doubtful
luster but the years immediately following the war restored
public confidence. Trade flourished on the sea. The frontier was
rapidly pushed to the Mississippi and beyond into the vast empire
which Jefferson had purchased. When everyone is busy, no one
cares for political issues, especially those based upon
philosophical differences. So Madison and Monroe succeeded to the
political regency which is known as the Virginia Dynasty.

This complacent epoch culminated in Monroe's "Era of Good
Feeling," which proved to be only the hush before the tornado.
The election of 1824 was indecisive, and the House of
Representatives was for a second time called upon to decide the
national choice. The candidates were John Quincy Adams, Andrew
Jackson, Henry Clay, and William H. Crawford. Clay threw his
votes to Adams, who was elected, thereby arousing the wrath of
Jackson and of the stalwart and irreconcilable frontiersmen who
hailed him as their leader. The Adams term merely marked a
transition from the old order to the new, from Jeffersonian to
Jacksonian democracy. Then was the word Republican dropped from
the party name, and Democrat became an appellation of definite
and practical significance.

By this time many of the older States had removed the early
restrictions upon voting, and the new States carved out of the
West had written manhood suffrage into their constitutions. This
new democracy flocked to its imperator; and Jackson entered his
capital in triumph, followed by a motley crowd of frontiersmen in
coonskin caps, farmers in butternut-dyed homespun, and hungry
henchmen eager for the spoils. For Jackson had let it be known
that he considered his election a mandate by the people to fill
the offices with his political adherents.

So the Democrats began their new lease of life with an orgy of
spoils. "Anybody is good enough for any job" was the favorite
watchword. But underneath this turmoil of desire for office,
significant party differences were shaping themselves. Henry
Clay, the alluring orator and master of compromise, brought
together a coalition of opposing fragments. He and his following
objected to Jackson's assumption of vast executive prerogatives,
and in a brilliant speech in the Senate Clay espoused the name
Whig. Having explained the origin of the term in English and
colonial politics, he cried: "And what is the present but the
same contest in another form? The partizans of the present
Executive sustain his favor in the most boundless extent. The
Whigs are opposing executive encroachment and a most alarming
extension of executive power and prerogative. They are contending
for the rights of the people, for free institutions, for the
supremacy of the Constitution and the laws."

There soon appeared three practical issues which forced the new
alignment. The first was the Bank. The charter of the United
States Bank was about to expire, and its friends sought a
renewal. Jackson believed the Bank an enemy of the Republic, as
its officers were anti-Jacksonians, and he promptly vetoed the
bill extending the charter. The second issue was the tariff.
Protection was not new; but Clay adroitly renamed it, calling it
"the American system." It was popular in the manufacturing towns
and in portions of the agricultural communities, but was bitterly
opposed by the slave-owning States.

A third issue dealt with internal improvements. All parts of the
country were feeling the need of better means of communication,
especially between the West and the East. Canals and turnpikes
were projected in every direction. Clay, whose imagination was
fervid, advocated a vast system of canals and roads financed by
national aid. But the doctrine of states-rights answered that the
Federal Government had no power to enter a State, even to spend
money on improvements, without the consent of that State. And, at
all events, for Clay to espouse was for Jackson to oppose.

These were the more important immediate issues of the conflict
between Clay's Whigs and Jackson's Democrats, though it must be
acknowledged that the personalities of the leaders were quite as
much an issue as any of the policies which they espoused. The
Whigs, however, proved unequal to the task of unhorsing their
foes; and, with two exceptions, the Democrats elected every
President from Jackson to Lincoln. The exceptions were William
Henry Harrison and Zachary Taylor, both of whom were elected on
their war records and both of whom died soon after their
inauguration. Tyler, who as Vice-President succeeded General
Harrison, soon estranged the Whigs, so that the Democratic
triumph was in effect continuous over a period of thirty years.

Meanwhile, however, another issue was shaping the destiny of
parties and of the nation. It was an issue that politicians
dodged and candidates evaded, that all parties avoided, that
publicists feared, and that presidents and congressmen tried to
hide under the tenuous fabric of their compromises. But
it was an issue that persisted in keeping alive and that would
not down, for it was an issue between right and wrong. Three
times the great Clay maneuvered to outflank his opponents over
the smoldering fires of the slavery issue, but he died before the
repeal of the Missouri Compromise gave the death-blow to his
loosely gathered coalition. Webster, too, and Calhoun, the other
members of that brilliant trinity which represented the genius of
Constitutional Unionism, of States Rights, and of Conciliation,
passed away before the issue was squarely faced by a new party
organized for the purpose of opposing the further expansion of
slavery.

This new organization, the Republican party, rapidly assumed form
and solidarity. It was composed of Northern Whigs, of
anti-slavery Democrats, and of members of several minor groups,
such as the Know-Nothing or American party, the Liberty party,
and included as well some of the despised Abolitionists. The vote
for Fremont, its first presidential candidate, in 1856, showed it
to be a sectional party, confined to the North. But the definite
recognition of slavery as an issue by an opposition party had a
profound effect upon the Democrats. Their Southern wing now
promptly assumed an uncompromising attitude, which, in 1860,
split the party into factions. The Southern wing named
Breckinridge; the Northern wing named Stephen A. Douglas; while
many Democrats as well as Whigs took refuge in a third party,
calling itself the Constitutional Union, which named John Bell.
This division cost the Democrats the election, for, under the
unique and inspiring leadership of Abraham Lincoln, the
Republicans rallied the anti-slavery forces of the North and won.

Slavery not only racked the parties and caused new alignments; it
racked and split the Union. It is one of the remarkable phenomena
of our political history that the Civil War did not destroy the
Democratic party, though the Southern chieftains of that party
utterly lost their cause. The reason is that the party never was
as purely a Southern as the Republican was a Northern party.
Moreover, the arrogance and blunders of the Republican leaders
during the days of Reconstruction helped to keep it alive. A
baneful political heritage has been handed down to us from the
Civil War--the solid South. It overturns the national balance of
parties, perpetuates a pernicious sectionalism, and deprives the
South of that bipartizan rivalry which keeps open the currents of
political life.

Since the Civil War the struggle between the two dominant parties
has been largely a struggle between the Ins and the Outs. The
issues that have divided them have been more apparent than real.
The tariff, the civil service, the trusts, and the long list of
other "issues" do not denote fundamental differences, but only
variations of degree. Never in any election during this long
interval has there been definitely at stake a great national
principle, save for the currency issue of 1896 and the colonial
question following the War with Spain. The revolt of the
Progressives in 1912 had a character of its own; but neither of
the old parties squarely joined issue with the Progressives in
the contest which followed. The presidential campaign of 1916
afforded an opportunity to place on trial before the people a
great cause, for there undoubtedly existed then in the country
two great and opposing sides of public opinion--one for and the
other against war with Germany. Here again, however, the issue
was not joined but was adroitly evaded by both the candidates.

None the less there has been a difference between the two great
parties. The Republican party has been avowedly nationalistic,
imperialistic, and in favor of a vigorous constructive foreign
policy. The Democratic party has generally accepted the lukewarm
international policy of Jefferson and the exaltation of the
locality and the plain individual as championed by Jackson. Thus,
though in a somewhat intangible and variable form, the doctrinal
distinctions between Hamilton and Jefferson have survived.

In the emergence of new issues, new parties are born. But it is
one of the singular characteristics of the American party system
that third parties are abortive. Their adherents serve mainly as
evangelists, crying their social and economic gospel in the
political wilderness. If the issues are vital, they are gradually
absorbed by the older parties.

Before the Civil War several sporadic parties were formed. The
most unique was the Anti-Masonic party. It flourished on the
hysteria caused by the abduction of William Morgan of Batavia, in
western New York, in 1826. Morgan had written a book purporting
to lay bare the secrets of Freemasonry. His mysterious
disappearance was laid at the doors of leading Freemasons; and it
was alleged that members of this order placed their secret
obligations above their duties as citizens and were hence unfit
for public office. The movement became impressive in
Pennsylvania, Vermont, Massachusetts, Ohio, and New York. It
served to introduce Seward and Fillmore into politics. Even a
national party was organized, and William Wirt, of Maryland, a
distinguished lawyer, was nominated for President. He received,
however, only the electoral votes of Vermont. The excitement soon
cooled, and the party disappeared.

The American or Know-Nothing party had for its slogan "America
for Americans," and was a considerable factor in certain
localities, especially in New York and the Middle States, from
1853 to 1856. The Free Soil party, espousing the cause of slavery
restriction, named Martin Van Buren as its presidential candidate
and polled enough votes in the election of 1848 to defeat Cass,
the Democratic candidate. It did not survive the election of
1852, but its essential principle was adopted by the Republican
party.

Since the Civil War, the currency question has twice given life
to third-party movements. The Greenbacks of 1876-1884 and the
Populists of the 90's were both of the West. Both carried on for
a few years a vigorous crusade, and both were absorbed by the
older parties as the currency question assumed concrete form and
became a commanding political issue. Since 1872, the
Prohibitionists have named national tickets. Their question,
which was always dodged by the dominant parties, is now rapidly
nearing a solution.

The one apparently unreconcilable element in our political life
is the socialistic or labor party. Never of great importance in
any national election, the various labor parties have been of
considerable influence in local politics. Because of its
magnitude, the labor vote has always been courted by Democrats
and Republicans with equal ardor but with varying success.



CHAPTER II. THE RISE OF THE MACHINE

Ideas or principles alone, however eloquently and insistently
proclaimed, will not make a party. There must be organization.
Thus we have two distinct practical phases of American party
politics: one regards the party as an agency of the electorate, a
necessary organ of democracy; the other, the party as an
organization, an army determined to achieve certain conquests.
Every party has, therefore, two aspects, each attracting a
different kind of person: one kind allured by the principles
espoused; the other, by the opportunities of place and personal
gain in the organization. The one kind typifies the body of
voters; the other the dominant minority of the party.

When one speaks, then, of a party in America, he embraces in that
term: first, the tenets or platform for which the party assumes
to stand (i.e., principles that may have been wrought out of
experience, may have been created by public opinion, or were
perhaps merely made out of hand by manipulators); secondly, the
voters who profess attachment to these principles; and thirdly,
the political expert, the politician with his organization or
machine. Between the expert and the great following are many
gradations of party activity, from the occasional volunteer to
the chieftain who devotes all his time to "politics."

It was discovered very early in American experience that without
organization issues would disintegrate and principles remain but
scintillating axioms. Thus necessity enlisted executive talent
and produced the politician, who, having once achieved an
organization, remained at his post to keep it intact between
elections and used it for purposes not always prompted by the
public welfare.

In colonial days, when the struggle began between Crown and
Colonist, the colonial patriots formed clubs to designate their
candidates for public office. In Massachusetts these clubs were
known as "caucuses," a word whose derivation is unknown, but
which has now become fixed in our political vocabulary. These
early caucuses in Boston have been described as follows: "Mr.
Samuel Adams' father and twenty others, one or two from the north
end of the town, where all the ship business is carried on, used
to meet, make a caucus, and lay their plans for introducing
certain persons into places of trust and power. When they had
settled it, they separated, and used each their particular
influence within his own circle. He and his friends would furnish
themselves with ballots, including the names of the parties fixed
upon, which they distributed on the day of election. By acting in
concert together with a careful and extensive distribution of
ballots they generally carried the elections to their own mind."

As the revolutionary propaganda increased in momentum, caucuses
assumed a more open character. They were a sort of informal town
meeting, where neighbors met and agreed on candidates and the
means of electing them. After the adoption of the Constitution,
the same methods were continued, though modified to suit the
needs of the new party alignments. In this informal manner, local
and even congressional candidates were named.

Washington was the unanimous choice of the nation. In the third
presidential election, John Adams was the tacitly accepted
candidate of the Federalists and Jefferson of the
Democratic-Republicans, and no formal nominations seem to have
been made. But from 1800 to 1824 the presidential candidates were
designated by members of Congress in caucus. It was by this means
that the Virginia Dynasty fastened itself upon the country. The
congressional caucus, which was one of the most arrogant and
compact political machines that our politics has produced,
discredited itself by nominating William H. Crawford (1824), a
machine politician, whom the public never believed to be of
presidential caliber. In the bitter fight that placed John Quincy
Adams in the White House and made Jackson the eternal enemy of
Clay, the congressional caucus met its doom. For several years,
presidential candidates were nominated by various informal
methods. In 1828 a number of state legislatures formally
nominated Jackson. In several States the party members of the
legislatures in caucus nominated presidential candidates. DeWitt
Clinton was so designated by the New York legislature in 1812 and
Henry Clay by the Kentucky legislature in 1822. Great mass
meetings, often garnished with barbecues, were held in many parts
of the country in 1824 for indorsing the informal nominations of
the various candidates.

But none of these methods served the purpose. The President was a
national officer, backed by a national party, and chosen by a
national electorate. A national system of nominating the
presidential candidates was demanded. On September 26, 1831, 113
delegates of the Anti-Masonic party, representing thirteen
States, met in a national convention in Baltimore. This was the
first national nominating convention held in America.

In February, 1831, the Whig members of the Maryland legislature
issued a call for a national Whig convention. This was held in
Baltimore the following December. Eighteen States were
represented by delegates, each according to the number of
presidential electoral votes it cast. Clay was named for
President. The first national Democratic convention met in
Baltimore on May 21, 1832, and nominated Jackson.

Since that time, presidential candidates have been named in
national conventions. There have been surprisingly few changes in
procedure since the first convention. It opened with a temporary
organization, examined the credentials of delegates, and
appointed a committee on permanent organization, which reported a
roster of permanent officers. It appointed a committee on
platform--then called an address to the people; it listened to
eulogistic nominating speeches, balloted for candidates, and
selected a committee to notify the nominees of their designation.
This is practically the order of procedure today. The national
convention is at once the supreme court and the supreme
legislature of the national party. It makes its own rules,
designates its committees, formulates their procedure and defines
their power, writes the platform, and appoints the national
executive committee.

Two rules that have played a significant part in these
conventions deserve special mention. The first Democratic
convention, in order to insure the nomination of Van Buren for
Vice-President--the nomination of Jackson for President was
uncontested--adopted the rule that "two-thirds of the whole
number of the votes in the convention shall be necessary to
constitute a choice." This "two-thirds" rule, so undemocratic in
its nature, remains the practice of the Democratic party today.
The Whigs and Republicans always adhered to the majority rule.
The early Democratic conventions also adopted the practice of
allowing the majority of the delegates from any State to cast the
vote of the entire delegation from that State, a rule which is
still adhered to by the Democrats. But the Republicans have since
1876 adhered to the policy of allowing each individual delegate
to cast his vote as he chooses.

The convention was by no means novel when accepted as a national
organ for a national party. As early as 1789 an informal
convention was held in the Philadelphia State House for
nominating Federalist candidates for the legislature. The
practice spread to many Pennsylvania counties and to other
States, and soon this informality of self-appointed delegates
gave way to delegates appointed according to accepted rules. When
the legislative caucus as a means for nominating state officers
fell into disrepute, state nominating conventions took its place.
In 1812 one of the earliest movements for a state convention was
started by Tammany Hall, because it feared that the legislative
caucus would nominate DeWitt Clinton, its bitterest foe. The
caucus, however, did not name Clinton, and the convention was not
assembled. The first state nominating convention was held in
Utica, New York, in 1824 by that faction of the Democratic party
calling itself the People's party. The custom soon spread to
every State, so that by 1835 it was firmly established. County
and city conventions also took the place of the caucus for naming
local candidates.

But nominations are only the beginning of the contest, and
obviously caucuses and conventions cannot conduct campaigns. So
from the beginning these nominating bodies appointed campaign
committees. With the increase in population came the increased
complexity of the committee system. By 1830 many of the States
had perfected a series of state, district, and county committees.

There remained the necessity of knitting these committees into a
national unity. The national convention which nominated Clay in
1831 appointed a "Central State Corresponding Committee" in each
State where none existed, and it recommended "to the several
States to organize subordinate corresponding committees in each
county and town." This was the beginning of what soon was to
evolve into a complete national hierarchy of committees. In 1848
the Democratic convention appointed a permanent national
committee, composed of one member from each State. This committee
was given the power to call the next national convention, and
from the start became the national executive body of the party.

It is a common notion that the politician and his machine are of
comparatively recent origin. But the American politician arose
contemporaneously with the party, and with such singular
fecundity of ways and means that it is doubtful if his modern
successors could teach him anything. McMaster declares: "A very
little study of long-forgotten politics will suffice to show that
in filibustering and gerrymandering, in stealing governorships
and legislatures, in using force at the polls, in colonizing and
in distributing patronage to whom patronage is due, in all the
frauds and tricks that go to make up the worst form of practical
politics, the men who founded our state and national governments
were always our equals, and often our masters." And this at a
time when only propertied persons could vote in any of the States
and when only professed Christians could either vote or hold
office in two of them!

While Washington was President, Tammany Hall, the first municipal
machine, began its career; and presently George Clinton, Governor
of New York, and his nephew, DeWitt Clinton, were busy organizing
the first state machine. The Clintons achieved their purpose
through the agency of a Council of Appointment, prescribed by the
first Constitution of the State, consisting of the Governor and
four senators chosen by the legislature. This council had the
appointment of nearly all the civil officers of the State from
Secretary of State to justices of the peace and auctioneers,
making a total of 8287 military and 6663 civil offices. As the
emoluments of some of these offices were relatively high, the
disposal of such patronage was a plum-tree for the politician.
The Clintons had been Anti-Federalists and had opposed the
adoption of the Constitution. In 1801 DeWitt Clinton became a
member of the Council of Appointment and soon dictated its
action. The head of every Federalist office-holder fell.
Sheriffs, county clerks, surrogates, recorders, justices by the
dozen, auctioneers by the score, were proscribed for the benefit
of the Clintons. De Witt was sent to the United States Senate in
1802, and at the age of thirty-three he found himself on the
highroad to political eminence. But he resigned almost at once to
become Mayor of New York City, a position he occupied for about
ten years, years filled with the most venomous fights between
Burrites and Bucktails. Clinton organized a compact machine in
the city. A biased contemporary description of this machine has
come down to us. "You [Clinton] are encircled by a mercenary
band, who, while they offer adulation to your system of error,
are ready at the first favorable moment to forsake and desert
you. A portion of them are needy young men, who without maturely
investigating the consequence, have sacrificed principle to
self-aggrandizement. Others are mere parasites, that well know
the tenure on which they hold their offices, and will ever pay
implicit obedience to those who administer to their wants. Many
of your followers are among the most profligate of the community.
They are the bane of social and domestic happiness, senile and
dependent panderers."

In 1812 Clinton became a candidate for President and polled 89
electoral votes against Madison's 128. Subsequently he became
Governor of New York on the Erie Canal issue; but his political
cunning seems to have forsaken him; and his perennial quarrels
with every other faction in his State made him the object of a
constant fire of vituperation. He had, however, taught all his
enemies the value of spoils, and he adhered to the end to the
political action he early advised a friend to adopt: "In a
political warfare, the defensive side will eventually lose. The
meekness of Quakerism will do in religion but not in politics. I
repeat it, everything will answer to energy and decision."

Martin Van Buren was an early disciple of Clinton. Though he
broke with his political chief in 1813, he had remained long
enough in the Clinton school to learn every trick; and he
possessed such native talent for intrigue, so smooth a manner,
and such a wonderful memory for names, that he soon found himself
at the head of a much more perfect and far-reaching machine than
Clinton had ever dreamed of. The Empire State has never produced
the equal of Van Buren as a manipulator of legislatures. No
modern politician would wish to face publicity if he resorted to
the petty tricks that Van Buren used in legislative politics. And
when, in 1821, he was elected to the Senate of the United States,
he became one of the organizers of the first national machine.

The state machine of Van Buren was long known as the "Albany
Regency." It included several very able politicians: William L.
Marcy, who became United States Senator in 1831; Silas Wright,
elected Senator in 1833; John A. Dix, who became Senator in 1845;
Benjamin F. Butler, who was United States Attorney-General under
President Van Buren, besides a score or more of prominent state
officials. It had an influential organ in the Albany Argus,
lieutenants in every county, and captains in every town. Its
confidential agents kept the leaders constantly informed of the
political situation in every locality; and its discipline made
the wish of Van Buren and his colleagues a command. Federal and
local patronage and a sagacious distribution of state contracts
sustained this combination. When the practice of nominating by
conventions began, the Regency at once discerned the strategic
value of controlling delegates, and, until the break in the
Democratic party in 1848, it literally reigned in the State.

With the disintegration of the Federalist party came the loss of
concentrated power by the colonial families of New England and
New York. The old aristocracy of the South was more fortunate in
the maintenance of its power. Jefferson's party was not only well
disciplined; it gave its confidence to a people still accustomed
to class rule and in turn was supported by them. In a strict
sense the Virginia Dynasty was not a machine like Van Buren's
Albany Regency. It was the effect of the concentrated influence
of men of great ability rather than a definite organization. The
congressional caucus was the instrument through which their
influence was made practical. In 1816, however, a considerable
movement was started to end the Virginia monopoly. It spread to
the Jeffersonians of the North. William H. Crawford, of Georgia,
and Daniel Tompkins, of New York, came forward as competitors
with Monroe for the caucus nomination. The knowledge of this
intrigue fostered the rising revolt against the caucus.
Twenty-two Republicans, many of whom were known to be opposed to
the caucus system, absented themselves. Monroe was nominated by
the narrow margin of eleven votes over Crawford. By the time
Monroe had served his second term the discrediting of the caucus
was made complete by the nomination of Crawford by a thinly
attended gathering of his adherents, who presumed to act for the
party. The Virginia Dynasty had no further favorites to foster,
and a new political force swept into power behind the dominating
personality of Andrew Jackson.

The new Democracy, however, did not remove the aristocratic power
of the slaveholder; and from Jackson's day to Buchanan's this
became an increasing force in the party councils. The slavery
question illustrates how a compact group of capable and
determined men, dominated by an economic motive, can exercise for
years in the political arena a preponderating influence, even
though they represent an actual minority of the nation. This
untoward condition was made possible by the political sagacity
and persistence of the party managers and by the unwillingness of
a large portion of the people to bring the real issue to a head.

Before the Civil War, then, party organization had become a fixed
and necessary incident in American politics. The war changed the
face of our national affairs. The changes wrought multiplied the
opportunities of the professional politician, and in these
opportunities, as well as in the transfused energies and ideals
of the people, we must seek the causes for those perversions of
party and party machinery which have characterized our modern
epoch.



CHAPTER III. THE TIDE OF MATERIALISM

The Civil War, which shocked the country into a new national
consciousness and rearranged the elements of its economic life,
also brought about a new era in political activity and
management. The United States after Appomattox was a very
different country from the United States before Sumter was fired
upon. The war was a continental upheaval, like the Appalachian
uplift in our geological history, producing sharp and profound
readjustments.

Despite the fact that in 1864 Lincoln had been elected on a Union
ticket supported by War Democrats, the Republicans claimed the
triumphs of the war as their own. They emerged from the struggle
with the enormous prestige of a party triumphant and with
"Saviors of the Union" inscribed on their banners.

The death of their wise and great leader opened the door to a
violent partizan orgy. President Andrew Johnson could not check
the fury of the radical reconstructionists; and a new political
era began in a riot of dogmatic and insolent dictatorship, which
was intensified by the mob of carpetbaggers, scalawags, and
freedmen in the South, and not abated by the lawless promptings
of the Ku-Klux to regain patrician leadership in the home of
secession nor by the baneful resentment of the North. The soldier
was made a political asset. For a generation the "bloody shirt"
was waved before the eyes of the Northern voter; and the evils,
both grotesque and gruesome, of an unnatural reconstruction are
not yet forgotten in the South.

A second opportunity of the politician was found in the rapid
economic expansion that followed the war. The feeling of security
in the North caused by the success of the Union arms buoyed an
unbounded optimism which made it easy to enlist capital in new
enterprises, and the protective tariff and liberal banking law
stimulated industry. Exports of raw material and food products
stimulated mining, grazing, and farming. European capital sought
investments in American railroads, mines, and industrial under-
takings. In the decade following the war the output of pig iron
doubled, that of coal multiplied by five, and that of steel by
one hundred. Superior iron and copper, Pennsylvania coal and oil,
Nevada and California gold and silver, all yielded their enormous
values to this new call of enterprise. Inventions and
manufactures of all kinds flourished. During 1850-60
manufacturing establishments had increased by fourteen per cent.
During 1860-70 they increased seventy-nine per cent.

The Homestead Act of May 20, 1862, opened vast areas of public
lands to a new immigration. The flow of population was westward,
and the West called for communication with the East. The Union
Pacific and Central Pacific railways, the pioneer
transcontinental lines, fostered on generous grants of land, were
the tokens of the new transportation movement. Railroads were
pushing forward everywhere with unheard-of rapidity. Short lines
were being merged into far-reaching systems. In the early
seventies the Pennsylvania system was organized and the
Vanderbilts acquired control of lines as far west as Chicago.
Soon the Baltimore and Ohio system extended its empire of trade
to the Mississippi. Half a dozen ambitious trans-Mississippi
systems, connecting with four new transcontinental projects, were
put into operation.

Prosperity is always the opportunity of the politician. What is
of greatest significance to the student of politics is that
prosperity at this time was organized on a new basis. Before the
war business had been conducted largely by individuals or
partnerships. The unit was small; the amount of capital needed
was limited. But now the unit was expanding so rapidly, the need
for capital was so lavish, the empire of trade so extensive, that
a new mechanism of ownership was necessary. This device, of
course, was the corporation. It had, indeed, existed as a trading
unit for many years. But the corporation before 1860 was
comparatively small and was generally based upon charters granted
by special act of the legislature.

No other event has had so practical a bearing on our politics and
our economic and social life as the advent of the corporate
device for owning and manipulating private business. For it links
the omnipotence of the State to the limitations of private
ownership; it thrusts the interests of private business into
every legislature that grants charters or passes regulating acts;
it diminishes, on the other hand, that stimulus to honesty and
correct dealing which a private individual discerns to be his
greatest asset in trade, for it replaces individual
responsibility with group responsibility and scatters ownership
among so large a number of persons that sinister manipulation is
possible.

But if the private corporation, through its interest in broad
charter privileges and liberal corporation laws and its devotion
to the tariff and to conservative financial policies, found it
convenient to do business with the politician and his
organization, the quasi-public corporations, especially the steam
railroads and street railways, found it almost essential to their
existence. They received not only their franchises but frequently
large bonuses from the public treasury. The Pacific roads alone
were endowed with an empire of 145,000,000 acres of public land.
States, counties, and cities freely loaned their credit and gave
ample charters to new railway lines which were to stimulate
prosperity.

City councils, legislatures, mayors, governors, Congress, and
presidents were drawn into the maelstrom of commercialism. It is
not surprising that side by side with the new business
organization there grew up a new political organization, and that
the new business magnate was accompanied by a new political
magnate. The party machine and the party boss were the natural
product of the time, which was a time of gain and greed. It was a
sordid reaction, indeed, from the high principles that sought
victory on the field of battle and that found their noblest
embodiment in the character of Abraham Lincoln.

The dominant and domineering party chose the leading soldier of
the North as its candidate for President. General Grant, elected
as a popular idol because of his military genius, possessed
neither the experience nor the skill to countermove the
machinations of designing politicians and their business allies.
On the other hand, he soon displayed an admiration for business
success that placed him at once in accord with the spirit of the
hour. He exalted men who could make money rather than men who
could command ideas. He chose Alexander T. Stewart, the New York
merchant prince, one of the three richest men of his day, for
Secretary of the Treasury. The law, however, forbade the
appointment to this office of any one who should "directly or
indirectly be concerned or interested in carrying on the business
of trade or commerce," and Stewart was disqualified. Adolph E.
Borie of Philadelphia, whose qualifications were the possession
of great wealth and the friendship of the President, was named
Secretary of the Navy. Another personal friend, John A. Rawlins,
was named Secretary of War. A third friend, Elihu B. Washburne of
Illinois, was made Secretary of State. Washburne soon resigned,
and Hamilton Fish of New York was appointed in his place. Fish,
together with General Jacob D. Cox of Ohio, Secretary of the
Interior, and Judge E. Rockwood Hoar of Massachusetts,
Attorney-General, formed a strong triumvirate of ability and
character in the Cabinet. But, while Grant displayed pleasure in
the companionship of these eminent men, they never possessed his
complete confidence. When the machinations for place and favor
began, Hoar and Cox were in the way. Hoar had offended the Senate
in his recommendations for federal circuit judges (the circuit
court was then newly established), and when the President named
him for Justice of the Supreme Court, Hoar was rejected. Senator
Cameron, one of the chief spoils politicians of the time, told
Hoar frankly why: "What could you expect for a man who had
snubbed seventy Senators!" A few months later (June, 1870), the
President bluntly asked for Hoar's resignation, a sacrifice to
the gods of the Senate, to purchase their favor for the Santo
Domingo treaty.

Cox resigned in the autumn. As Secretary of the Interior he had
charge of the Patent Office, Census Bureau, and Indian Service,
all of them requiring many appointments. He had attempted to
introduce a sort of civil service examination for applicants and
had vehemently protested against political assessments levied on
clerks in his department. He especially offended Senators Cameron
and Chandler, party chieftains who had the ear of the President.
General Cox stated the matter plainly: "My views of the necessity
of reform in the civil service had brought me more or less into
collision with the plans of our active political managers and my
sense of duty has obliged me to oppose some of their methods of
action." These instances reveal how the party chieftains insisted
inexorably upon their demands. To them the public service was
principally a means to satisfy party ends, and the chief duty of
the President and his Cabinet was to satisfy the claims of party
necessity. General Cox said that distributing offices occupied
"the larger part of the time of the President and all his
Cabinet." General Garfield wrote (1877): "One-third of the
working hours of Senators and Representatives is hardly
sufficient to meet the demands made upon them in reference to
appointments to office."

By the side of the partizan motives stalked the desire for gain.
There were those to whom parties meant but the opportunity for
sudden wealth. The President's admiration for commercial success
and his inability to read the motives of sycophants multiplied
their opportunities, and in the eight years of his administration
there was consummated the baneful union of business and politics.

During the second Grant campaign (1872), when Horace Greeley was
making his astounding run for President, the New York Sun hinted
at gross and wholesale briberies of Congressmen by Oakes Ames and
his associates who had built the Union Pacific Railroad, an
enterprise which the United States had generously aided with
loans and gifts.

Three committees of Congress, two in the House and one in the
Senate (the Poland Committee, the Wilson Committee, and the
Senate Committee), subsequently investigated the charges. Their
investigations disclosed the fact that Ames, then a member of the
House of Representatives, the principal stockholder in the Union
Pacific, and the soul of the enterprise, had organized, under an
existing Pennsylvania charter, a construction company called the
Credit Mobilier, whose shares were issued to Ames and his
associates. To the Credit Mobilier were issued the bonds and
stock of the Union Pacific, which had been paid for "at not more
than thirty cents on the dollar in road-making."* As the United
States, in addition to princely gifts of land, had in effect
guaranteed the cost of construction by authorizing the issue of
Government bonds, dollar for dollar and side by side with the
bonds of the road, the motive of the magnificent shuffle, which
gave the road into the hands of a construction company, was
clear. Now it was alleged that stock of the Credit Mobilier,
paying dividends of three hundred and forty per cent, had been
distributed by Ames among many of his fellow-Congressmen, in
order to forestall a threatened investigation. It was disclosed
that some of the members had refused point blank to have anything
to do with the stock; others had refused after deliberation;
others had purchased some of it outright; others, alas!, had
"purchased" it, to be paid for out of its own dividends.

* Testimony before the Wilson Committee.


The majority of the members involved in the nasty affair were
absolved by the Poland Committee from "any corrupt motive or
purpose." But Oakes Ames of Massachusetts and James Brooks of New
York were recommended for expulsion from the House and Patterson
of New Hampshire from the Senate. The House, however, was content
with censuring Ames and Brooks, and the Senate permitted
Patterson's term to expire, since only five days of it remained.
Whatever may have been the opinion of Congress, and whatever a
careful reading of the testimony discloses to an impartial mind
at this remote day, upon the voters of that time the revelations
came as a shock. Some of the most trusted Congressmen were drawn
into the miasma of suspicion, among them Garfield; Dawes;
Scofield; Wilson, the newly elected Vice-President; Colfax, the
outgoing Vice-President. Colfax had been a popular idol, with the
Presidency in his vision; now bowed and disgraced, he left the
national capital never to return with a public commission.

In 1874 came the disclosures of the Whiskey Ring. They involved
United States Internal Revenue officers and distillers in the
revenue district of St. Louis and a number of officials at
Washington. Benjamin H. Bristow, on becoming Secretary of the
Treasury in June of that year, immediately scented corruption. He
discovered that during 1871-74 only about one-third of the
whiskey shipped from St. Louis had paid the tax and that the
Government had been defrauded of nearly $3,000,000. "If a
distiller was honest," says James Ford Rhodes, the eminent
historian, "he was entrapped into some technical violation of the
law by the officials, who by virtue of their authority seized his
distillery, giving him the choice of bankruptcy or a partnership
in their operations; and generally he succumbed."

McDonald, the supervisor of the St. Louis revenue district, was
the leader of the Whiskey Ring. He lavished gifts upon President
Grant, who, with an amazing indifference and innocence, accepted
such favors from all kinds of sources. Orville E. Babcock, the
President's private secretary, who possessed the complete
confidence of the guileless general, was soon enmeshed in the net
of investigation. Grant at first declared, "If Babcock is guilty,
there is no man who wants him so much proven guilty as I do, for
it is the greatest piece of traitorism to me that a man could
possibly practice." When Babcock was indicted, however, for
complicity to defraud the Government, the President did not
hesitate to say on oath that he had never seen anything in
Babcock's behavior which indicated that he was in any way
interested in the Whiskey Ring and that he had always had "great
confidence in his integrity and efficiency." In other ways the
President displayed his eagerness to defend his private
secretary. The jury acquitted Babcock, but the public did not. He
was compelled to resign under pressure of public condemnation,
and was afterwards indicted for conspiracy to rob a safe of
documents of an incriminating character. But Grant seems never to
have lost faith in him. Three of the men sent to prison for their
complicity in the whiskey fraud were pardoned after six months.
McDonald, the chieftain of the gang, served but one year of his
term.

The exposure of the Whiskey Ring was followed by an even more
startling humiliation. The House Committee on Expenditures in the
War Department recommended that General William W. Belknap,
Secretary of War, be impeached for "high crimes and misdemeanors
while in office," and the House unanimously adopted the
recommendation. The evidence upon which the committee based its
drastic recommendation disclosed the most sordid division of
spoils between the Secretary and his wife and two rascals who
held in succession the valuable post of trader at Fort Sill in
the Indian Territory.

The committee's report was read about three o'clock in the
afternoon of March 2, 1876. In the forenoon of the same day
Belknap had sent his resignation to the President, who had
accepted it immediately. The President and Belknap were personal
friends. But the certainty of Belknap's perfidy was not removed
by the attitude of the President, nor by the vote of the Senate
on the article of impeachment--37 guilty, 25 not guilty-for the
evidence was too convincing. The public knew by this time Grant's
childlike failing in sticking to his friends; and 93 of the 25
Senators who voted not guilty had publicly declared they did so,
not because they believed him innocent, but because they believed
they had no jurisdiction over an official who had resigned.

There were many minor indications of the harvest which gross
materialism was reaping in the political field. State and city
governments were surrendered to political brigands. In 1871 the
Governor of Nebraska was removed for embezzlement. Kansas was
startled by revelations of brazen bribery in her senatorial
elections (1872-1873). General Schenck, representing the United
States at the Court of St. James, humiliated his country by
dabbling in a fraudulent mining scheme.

In a speech before the Senate, then trying General Belknap,
Senator George F. Hoar, on May 6, 1876, summed up the greater
abominations:

"My own public life has been a very brief and insignificant one,
extending little beyond the duration of a single term of
senatorial office. But in that brief period I have seen five
judges of a high court of the United States driven from office by
threats of impeachment for corruption or maladministration. I
have heard the taunt from friendliest lips, that when the United
States presented herself in the East to take part with the
civilized world in generous competition in the arts of life, the
only products of her institutions in which she surpassed all
others beyond question was her corruption. I have seen in the
State in the Union foremost in power and wealth four judges of
her courts impeached for corruption, and the political
administration of her chief city become a disgrace and a byword
throughout the world. I have seen the chairman of the Committee
on Military Affairs in the House rise in his place and demand the
expulsion of four of his associates for making sale of their
official privilege of selecting the youths to be educated at our
great military schools. When the greatest railroad of the world,
binding together the continent and uniting the two great seas
which wash our shores, was finished, I have seen our national
triumph and exaltation turned to bitterness and shame by the
unanimous reports of three committees of Congress--two in the
House and one here--that every step of that mighty enterprise had
been taken in fraud. I have heard in highest places the shameless
doctrine avowed by men grown old in public office that the true
way by which power should be gained in the Republic is to bribe
the people with the offices created for their service, and the
true end for which it should be used when gained is the promotion
of selfish ambition and the gratification of personal revenge. I
have heard that suspicions haunt the footsteps of the trusted
companions of the President."

These startling facts did not shatter the prestige of the
Republicans, the "Saviors of the Union," nor humble their
leaders. One of them, Senator Foraker, says*: "The campaign
(1876) on the part of the Democrats gave emphasis to the reform
idea and exploited Tilden as the great reform governor of New
York and the best fitted man in the country to bring about
reforms in the Government of the United States. No reforms were
needed: but a fact like that never interfered with a reform
campaign." The orthodoxy of the politician remained unshaken.
Foraker's reasons were the creed of thousands: "The Republican
party had prosecuted the war successfully; had reconstructed the
States; had rehabilitated our finances, and brought on specie
redemption." The memoirs of politicians and statesmen of this
period, such as Cullom, Foraker, Platt, even Hoar, are imbued
with an inflexible faith in the party and colored by the
conviction that it is a function of Government to aid business.
Platt, for instance, alluding to Blaine's attitude as Speaker, in
the seventies, said: "What I liked about him was his frank and
persistent contention that the citizen who best loved his party
and was loyal to it, was loyal to and best loved his country."
And many years afterwards, when a new type of leader appeared
representing a new era of conviction, Platt was deeply concerned.
His famous letter to Roosevelt, when the Rough Rider was being
mentioned for Governor of New York (1899), shows the reluctance
of the old man to see the signs of the times: "The thing that
really did bother me was this: I had heard from a great many
sources that you were a little loose on the relations of capital
and labor, on trusts and combinations, and indeed on the numerous
questions which have recently arisen in politics affecting the
security of earnings and the right of a man to run his own
business in his own way, with due respect of course to the Ten
Commandments and the Penal Code."

* "Notes from a Busy Life", vol. I., 98.


The leaders of both the great parties firmly and honestly
believed that it was the duty of the Government to aid private
enterprise, and that by stimulating business everybody is helped.
This article of faith, with the doctrine of the sanctity of the
party, was a natural product of the conditions outlined in the
beginning of this chapter--the war and the remarkable economic
expansion following the war. It was the cause of the alliance
between business and politics. It made the machine and the boss
the sinister and ever present shadows of legitimate organization
and leadership.



CHAPTER IV. THE POLITICIAN AND THE CITY

The gigantic national machine that was erected during Grant's
administration would have been ineffectual without local sources
of power. These sources of power were found in the cities, now
thriving on the new-born commerce and industry, increasing
marvelously in numbers and in size, and offering to the political
manipulator opportunities that have rarely been paralleled.*

* Between 1860 and 1890 the number of cities of 8000 or more
inhabitants increased from 141 to 448, standing at 226 in 1870.
In 1865 less than 20% of our people lived in the cities; in 1890,
over 30%; in 1900, 40%; in 1910, 46.3%. By 1890 there were six
cities with more than half a million inhabitants, fifteen with
more than 200,000, and twenty-eight with more than 100,000. In
1910 there were twenty-eight cities with a population over
200,000, fifty cities over 100,000, and ninety-eight over 50,000.
It was no uncommon occurrence for a city to double its population
in a decade. In ten years Birmingham gained 245%, Los Angeles,
211%, Seattle, 194%, Spokane, 183%, Dallas, 116%, Schenectady,
129%.


The governmental framework of the American city is based on the
English system as exemplified in the towns of Colonial America.
Their charters were received from the Crown and their business
was conducted by a mayor and a council composed of aldermen and
councilmen. The mayor was usually appointed; the council elected
by a property-holding electorate. In New England the glorified
town meeting was an important agency of local government.

After the Revolution, mayors as well as councilmen were elected,
and the charters of the towns were granted by the legislature,
not by the executive, of the State. In colonial days charters had
been granted by the King. They had fixed for the city certain
immunities and well-defined spheres of autonomy. But when the
legislatures were given the power to grant charters, they reduced
the charter to the level of a statutory enactment, which could be
amended or repealed by any successive legislature, thereby
opening up a convenient field for political maneuvering. The
courts have, moreover, construed these charters strictly, holding
the cities closely bound to those powers which the legislatures
conferred upon them.

The task of governing the early American town was simple enough.
In 1790 New York, Philadelphia, Boston, Baltimore, and Charleston
were the only towns in the United States of over 8000
inhabitants; all together they numbered scarcely 130,000. Their
populations were homogeneous; their wants were few; and they were
still in that happy childhood when every voter knew nearly every
other voter and when everybody knew his neighbor's business as
well as his own, and perhaps better.

Gradually the towns awoke to their newer needs and demanded
public service--lighting, street cleaning, fire protection,
public education. All these matters, however, could be easily
looked after by the mayor and the council committees. But when
these towns began to spread rapidly into cities, they quickly
outgrew their colonial garments. Yet the legislatures were loath
to cast the old garments aside. One may say that from 1840 to
1901, when the Galveston plan of commission government was
inaugurated, American municipal government was nothing but a
series of contests between a small body of alert citizens
attempting to fix responsibility on public officers and a few
adroit politicians attempting to elude responsibility; both sides
appealing to an electorate which was habitually somnolent but
subject to intermittent awakenings through spasms of
righteousness.

During this epoch no important city remained immune from ruthless
legislative interference. Year after year the legislature shifted
officers and responsibilities at the behest of the boss. "Ripper
bills" were passed, tearing up the entire administrative systems
of important municipalities. The city was made the plaything of
the boss and the machine.

Throughout the constant shifts that our city governments have
undergone one may, however, discern three general plans of
government.

The first was the centering of power in the city council, whether
composed of two chambers--a board of aldermen and a common
council--as in New York, Philadelphia, and Chicago, or of one
council, as in many lesser cities. It soon became apparent that a
large body, whose chief function is legislation, is utterly unfit
to look after administrative details. Such a body, in order to do
business, must act through committees. Responsibility is
scattered. Favoritism is possible in letting contracts, in making
appointments, in depositing city funds, in making public
improvements, in purchasing supplies and real estate, and in a
thousand other ways. So, by controlling the appointment of
committees, a shrewd manipulator could virtually control all the
municipal activities and make himself overlord of the city.

The second plan of government attempted to make the mayor the
controlling force. It reduced the council to a legislative body
and exalted the mayor into a real executive with power to appoint
and to remove heads of departments, thereby making him
responsible for the city administration. Brooklyn under Mayor
Seth Low was an encouraging example of this type of government.
But the type was rarely found in a pure form. The politician
succeeded either in electing a subservient mayor or in curtailing
the mayor's authority by having the heads of departments elected
or appointed by the council or made subject to the approval of
the council. If the council held the key to the city treasury,
the boss reigned, for councilmen from properly gerrymandered
wards could usually be trusted to execute his will.

The third form of government was government by boards. Here it
was attempted to place the administration of various municipal
activities in the hands of independent boards. Thus a board had
charge of the police, another of the fire department, another of
public works, and so on. Often there were a dozen of these boards
and not infrequently over thirty in a single city, as in
Philadelphia. Sometimes these boards were elected by the people;
sometimes they were appointed by the council; sometimes they were
appointed by the mayor; in one or two instances they were
appointed by the Governor. Often their powers were shared with
committees of the council; a committee on police, for instance,
shared with the Board of Police Commissioners the direction of
police affairs. Usually these boards were responsible to no one
but the electorate (and that remotely) and were entirely without
coordination, a mere agglomeration of independent creations
generally with ill-defined powers.

Sometimes the laws provided that not all the members of the
appointive boards should "belong to the same political party" or
"be of the same political opinion in state and national issues."
It was clearly the intention to wipe out the partizan complexion
of such boards. But this device was no stumbling-block to the
boss. Whatever might be the "opinions" on national matters of the
men appointed, they usually had a perfect understanding with the
appointing authorities as to local matters. As late as 1898, a
Democratic mayor of New York (Van Wyck) summarily removed the two
Republican members of the Board of Police Commissioners and
replaced them by Republicans after his own heart. In truth, the
bipartizan board fitted snugly into the dual party regime that
existed in many cities, whereby the county offices were
apportioned to one party, the city offices to the other, and the
spoils to both. It is doubtful if any device was ever more
deceiving and less satisfactory than the bipartizan board.

The reader must not be led to think that any one of these plans
of municipal government prevailed at any one time. They all still
exist, contemporaneously with the newer commission plan and the
city manager plan.

Hand in hand with these experiments in governmental mechanisms
for the growing cities went a rapidly increasing expenditure of
public funds. Streets had to be laid out, paved, and lighted;
sewers extended; firefighting facilities increased; schools
built; parks, boulevards, and playgrounds acquired, and scores of
new activities undertaken by the municipality. All these brought
grist to the politician's mill. So did his control of the police
force and the police courts. And finally, with the city reaching
its eager streets far out into the country, came the necessity
for rapid transportation, which opened up for the municipal
politician a new El Dorado.

Under our laws the right of a public service corporation to
occupy the public streets is based upon a franchise from the
city. Before the days of the referendum the franchise was granted
by the city council, usually as a monopoly, sometimes in
perpetuity; and, until comparatively recent years, the
corporation paid nothing to the city for the rights it acquired.

When we reflect that within a few decades of the discovery of
electric power, every city, large and small, had its street-car
and electric-light service, and that most of these cities,
through their councils, gave away these monopoly rights for long
periods of time, we can imagine the princely aggregate of the
gifts which public service corporations have received at the
hands of our municipal governments, and the nature of the
temptations these corporations were able to spread before the
greedy gaze of those whose gesture would seal the grant.

But it was not only at the granting of the franchise that the
boss and his machine sought for spoils. A public service
corporation, being constantly asked for favors, is a continuing
opportunity for the political manipulator. Public service
corporations could share their patronage with the politician in
exchange for favors. Through their control of many jobs, and
through their influence with banks, they could show a wide
assortment of favors to the politician in return for his
influence; for instance, in the matter of traffic regulations,
permission to tear up the streets, inspection laws, rate
schedules, tax assessments, coroners' reports, or juries.

When the politician went to the voters, he adroitly concealed his
designs under the name of one of the national parties. Voters
were asked to vote for a Republican or a Democrat, not for a
policy of municipal administration or other local policies. The
system of committees, caucuses, conventions, built up in every
city, was linked to the national organization. A citizen of New
York, for instance, was not asked to vote for the Broadway
Franchise, which raised such a scandal in the eighties, but to
vote for aldermen running on a national tariff ticket!

The electorate was somnolent and permitted the politician to have
his way. The multitudes of the city came principally from two
sources, from Europe and from the rural districts of our own
country. Those who came to the city from the country were
prompted by industrial motives; they sought wider opportunities;
they soon became immersed in their tasks and paid little
attention to public questions. The foreign immigrants who
congested our cities were alien to American institutions. They
formed a heterogeneous population to whom a common ideal of
government was unknown and democracy a word without meaning.
These foreigners were easily influenced and easily led. Under the
old naturalization laws, they were herded into the courts just
before election and admitted to citizenship. In New York they
were naturalized under the guidance of wardheelers, not
infrequently at the rate of one a minute! And, before the days of
registration laws, ballots were distributed to them and they were
led to the polls, as charity children are given excursion tickets
and are led to their annual summer's day picnic.

The slipshod methods of naturalization have been revealed since
the new law (1906) has been in force. Tens of thousands of voters
who thought they were citizens found that their papers were only
declarations of intentions, or "first papers." Other tens of
thousands had lost even these papers and could not designate the
courts that had issued them; and other thousands found that the
courts that had naturalized them were without jurisdiction in the
matter.

It was not merely among these newcomers that the boss found his
opportunities for carrying elections. The dense city blocks were
convenient lodging places for "floaters." Just before elections,
the population of the downtown wards in the larger cities
increased surprisingly. The boss fully availed himself of the
psychological and social reactions of the city upon the
individual, knowing instinctively how much more easily men are
corrupted when they are merged in the crowd and have lost their
sense of personal responsibility.

It was in the city, then, that industrial politics found their
natural habitat. We shall now scrutinize more closely some of the
developments which arose out of such an environment.



CHAPTER V. TAMMANY HALL

Before the Revolutionary War numerous societies were organized to
aid the cause of Independence. These were sometimes called "Sons
of Liberty" and not infrequently "Sons of St. Tammany," after an
Indian brave whom tradition had shrouded in virtue. The name was
probably adopted to burlesque the royalist societies named after
St. George, St. David, or St. Andrew. After the war these
societies vanished. But, in New York City, William Mooney, an
upholsterer, reorganized the local society as "Tammany Society or
Columbian Order," devoted ostensibly to goodfellowship and
charity. Its officers bore Indian titles and its ceremonies were
more or less borrowed from the red man, not merely because of
their unique and picturesque character, but to emphasize the
truly American and anti-British convictions of its members. The
society attracted that element of the town's population which
delighted in the crude ceremonials and the stimulating potions
that always accompanied them, mostly small shopkeepers and
mechanics. It was among this class that the spirit of discontent
against the power of Federalism was strongest--a spirit that has
often become decisive in our political fortunes.

This was still the day of the "gentleman," of small clothes,
silver shoe-buckles, powdered wigs, and lace ruffles. Only
taxpayers and propertied persons could vote, and public office
was still invested with certain prerogatives and privileges.
Democracy was little more than a name. There was, however, a
distinct division of sentiment, and the drift towards democracy
was accelerated by immigration. The newcomers were largely of the
humble classes, among whom the doctrines of democratic discontent
were welcome.

Tammany soon became partizan. The Federalist members withdrew,
probably influenced by Washington's warning against secret
political societies. By 1798 it was a Republican club meeting in
various taverns, finally selecting Martling's "Long Room" for its
nightly carousals. Soon after this a new constitution was adopted
which adroitly transformed the society into a compact political
machine, every member subscribing to the oath that he would
resist the encroachments of centralized power over the State.

Tradition has it that the transformer of Tammany into the first
compact and effective political machine was Aaron Burr. There is
no direct evidence that he wrote the new constitution. But there
is collateral evidence. Indeed, it would not have been Burrian
had he left any written evidence of his connection with the
organization. For Burr was one of those intriguers who revel in
mystery, who always hide their designs, and never bind themselves
in writing without leaving a dozen loopholes for escape. He was
by this time a prominent figure in American politics. His skill
had been displayed in Albany, both in the passing of legislation
and in out-maneuvering Hamilton and having himself elected United
States Senator against the powerful combination of the
Livingstons and the Schuylers. He was plotting for the Presidency
as the campaign of 1800 approached, and Tammany was to be the
fulcrum to lift him to this conspicuous place.

Under the ostensible leadership of Matthew L. Davis, Burr's chief
lieutenant, every ward of the city was carefully organized, a
polling list was made, scores of new members were pledged to
Tammany, and during the three days of voting (in New York State
until 1840 elections lasted three days), while Hamilton was
making eloquent speeches for the Federalists, Burr was secretly
manipulating the wires of his machine. Burr and Tammany won in
New York City, though Burr failed to win the Presidency. The
political career of this remarkable organization, which has
survived over one hundred and twenty years of stormy history, was
now well launched.

From that time to the present the history of Tammany Hall is a
tale of victories, followed by occasional disclosures of
corruption and favoritism; of quarrels with governors and
presidents; of party fights between "up-state" and "city"; of
skulking when its sachems were unwelcome in the White House; of
periodical displays of patriotism for cloaking its grosser
crimes; of perennial charities for fastening itself more firmly
on the poorer populace which has always been the source of its
power; of colossal municipal enterprise for profit-sharing; and
of a continuous political efficiency due to sagacious leadership,
a remarkable adaptability to the necessities of the hour, and a
patience that outlasts every "reform."

It early displayed all the traits that have made it successful.
In 1801, for the purpose of carrying city elections, it provided
thirty-nine men with money to purchase houses and lots in one
ward, and seventy men with money for the same purpose in another
ward, thus manufacturing freeholders for polling purposes. In
1806 Benjamin Romaine, a grand sachem, was removed from the
office of city controller by his own party for acquiring land
from the city without paying for it. In 1807 several
superintendents of city institutions were dismissed for frauds.
The inspector of bread, a sachem, resigned because his threat to
extort one-third of the fees from his subordinates had become
public. Several assessment collectors, all prominent in Tammany,
were compelled to reimburse the city for deficits in their
accounts. One of the leading aldermen used his influence to
induce the city to sell land to his brother-in-law at a low
price, and then bade the city buy it back for many times its
value. Mooney, the founder of the society, now superintendent of
the almshouse, was caught in a characteristic fraud. His salary
was $1000 a year, with $500 for family expenses. But it was
discovered that his "expenses" amounted to $4000 a year, and that
he had credited to himself on the books $1000 worth of supplies
and numerous sums for "trifles for Mrs. Mooney."

In September, 1826, the Grand Jury entered an indictment against
Matthew L. Davis and a number of other Tammany men for defrauding
several banks and insurance companies of over $2,000,000. This
created a tremendous sensation. Political influence was at once
set in motion, and only the minor defendants were sent to the
penitentiary.

In 1829 Samuel Swartwout, one of the Tammany leaders, was
appointed Collector of the Port of New York. His downfall came in
1838, and he fled to Europe. His defalcations in the Custom House
were found to be over $1,222,700; and "to Swartwout" became a
useful phrase until Tweed's day. He was succeeded by Jesse Hoyt,
another sachem and notorious politician, against whom several
judgments for default were recorded in the Superior Court, which
were satisfied very soon after his appointment. At this time
another Tammany chieftain, W. M. Price, United States District
Attorney for Southern New York, defaulted for $75,000.

It was in 1851 that the council commonly known as "The Forty
Thieves" was elected. In it William M. Tweed served his
apprenticeship. Some of the maneuvers of this council and of
other officials were divulged by a Grand Jury in its presentment
of February 23, 1853. The presentment states: "It was clearly
shown that enormous sums of money were spent for the procurement
of railroad grants in the city, and that towards the decision and
procurement of the Eighth Avenue railway grant, a sum so large
that would startle the most credulous was expended; but in
consequence of the voluntary absence of important witnesses, the
Grand Jury was left without direct testimony of the particular
recipients of the different amounts."

These and other exposures brought on a number of amendments to
the city charter, surrounding with greater safeguards the sale or
lease of city property and the letting of contracts; and a reform
council was elected. Immediately upon the heels of this reform
movement followed the shameful regime of Fernando Wood, an able,
crafty, unscrupulous politician, who began by announcing himself
a reformer, but who soon became a boss in the most offensive
sense of that term--not, however, in Tammany Hall, for he was
ousted from that organization after his reelection as mayor in
1856. He immediately organized a machine of his own, Mozart Hall.
The intense struggle between the two machines cost the city a
great sum, for the taxpayers were mulcted to pay the bills.

Through the anxious days of the Civil War, when the minds of
thoughtful citizens were occupied with national issues, the tide
of reform ebbed and flowed. A reform candidate was elected mayor
in 1863, but Tammany returned to power two years later by
securing the election and then the reelection of John T. Hoffman.
Hoffman possessed considerable ability and an attractive
personality. His zeal for high office, however, made him easily
amenable to the manipulators. Tammany made him Governor and
planned to name him for President. Behind his popularity, which
was considerable, and screened by the greater excitements of the
war, reconstruction, and the impeachment of Andrew Johnson,
lurked the Ring, whose exposures and confessions were soon to
amaze everyone.

The chief ringster was William M. Tweed, and his name will always
be associated in the public mind with political bossdom. This is
his immortality. He was a chairmaker by trade, a vulgar good
fellow by nature, a politician by circumstances, a boss by
evolution, and a grafter by choice. He became grand sachem of
Tammany and chairman of the general committee. This committee he
ruled with blunt directness. When he wanted a question carried,
he failed to ask for the negative votes; and soon he was called
"the Boss," a title he never resented, and which usage has since
fixed in our politics. So he ruled Tammany with a high hand; made
nominations arbitrarily; bullied, bought, and traded; became
President of the Board of Supervisors, thus holding the key to
the city's financial policies; and was elected State Senator,
thereby directing the granting of legislative favors to his city
and to his corporations.

In 1868 Tammany carried Hoffman into the Governor's chair, and in
the following year the Democrats carried the State legislature.
Tweed now had a new charter passed which virtually put New York
City into his pocket by placing the finances of the metropolis
entirely in the hands of a Board of Apportionment which he
dominated. Of this Board, the mayor of the city was the chairman,
with the power to appoint the other members. He promptly named
Tweed, Connolly, and P. B. Sweeny. This was the famous Ring. The
mayor was A. Oakey Hall, dubbed "Elegant Oakey" by his pals
because of his fondness for clubs, society, puns, and poems; but
Nast called him "O. K. Haul." Sweeny, commonly known as "Pete,"
was a lawyer of ability, and was generally believed to be the
plotter of the quartet. Nast transformed his middle initial B.
into "Brains." Connolly was just a coarse gangster.

There was some reason for the Ring's faith in its
invulnerability. It controlled Governor and legislature, was
formidable in the national councils of the Democratic party, and
its Governor was widely mentioned for the presidential
nomination. It possessed complete power over the city council,
the mayor, and many of the judges. It was in partnership with
Gould and Fiske of the Erie, then reaping great harvests in Wall
Street, and with street railway and other public service
corporations. Through untold largess it silenced rivalry from
within and criticism from without. And, when suspicion first
raised its voice, it adroitly invited a committee of prominent
and wealthy citizens, headed by John Jacob Astor, to examine the
controller's accounts. After six hours spent in the City Hall
these respectable gentlemen signed an acquitment, saying that
"the affairs of the city under the charge of the controller are
administered in a correct and faithful manner."

Thus intrenched, the Ring levied tribute on every municipal
activity. Everyone who had a charge against the city, either for
work done or materials furnished, was told to add to the amount
of his bill, at first 10%, later 66%, and finally 85%. One man
testified that he was told to raise to $55,000 his claim of
$5000. He got his $5000; the Ring got $50,000. The building of
the Court House, still known as "Tweed's Court House," was
estimated to cost $3,000,000, but it cost many times that sum.
The item "repairing fixtures" amounted to $1,149,874.50, before
the building was completed. Forty chairs and three tables cost
$179,729.60; thermometers cost $7500. G. S. Miller, a carpenter,
received $360,747.61, and a plasterer named Gray, $2,870,464.06
for nine months' "work." The Times dubbed him the "Prince of
Plasterers." "A plasterer who can earn $138,187 in two days
[December 20 and 21] and that in the depths of winter, need not
be poor." Carpets cost $350,000, most of the Brussels and
Axminster going to the New Metropolitan Hotel just opened by
Tweed's son.

The Ring's hold upon the legislature was through bribery, not
through partizan adhesion. Tweed himself confessed that he gave
one man in Albany $600,000 for buying votes to pass his charter;
and Samuel J. Tilden estimated the total cost for this purpose at
over one million dollars. Tweed said he bought five Republican
senators for $40,000 apiece. The vote on the charter was 30 to 2
in the Senate, 116 to 5 in the Assembly. Similar sums were spent
in Albany in securing corporate favors. The Viaduct Railway Bill
is an example. This bill empowered a company, practically owned
by the Ring, to build a railway on or above any street in the
city. It provided that the city should subscribe for $5,000,000
of the stock; and it exempted the company from taxation.
Collateral bills were introduced enabling the company to widen
and grade any streets, the favorite "job" of a Tammany grafter.
Fortunately for the city, exposure came before this monstrous
scheme could be put in motion.

Newspapers in the city were heavily subsidized. Newspapers in
Albany were paid munificently for printing. One of the Albany
papers received $207,900 for one year's work which was worth less
than $10,000. Half a dozen reporters of the leading dailies were
put on the city payroll at from $2000 to $2500 a year for
"services."

The Himalayan size of these swindles and their monumental
effrontery led the New York Sun humorously to suggest the
erection of a statue to the principal Robber Baron, "in
commemoration of his services to the commonwealth." A letter was
sent out asking for funds. There were a great many men in New
York, the Sun thought, who would not be unwilling to refuse a
contribution. But Tweed declined the honor. In its issue of March
14, 1871, the Sun has this headline:

"A GREAT MAN'S MODESTY"

"THE HON. WILLIAM M. TWEED DECLINES THE SUN'S STATUE.
CHARACTERISTIC LETTER FROM THE GREAT NEW YORK PHILANTHROPIST. HE
THINKS THAT VIRTUE SHOULD BE ITS OWN REWARD. THE MOST REMARKABLE
LETTER EVER WRITTEN BY THE NOBLE BENEFACTOR OF THE PEOPLE."

Another kind of memorial to his genius for absorbing the people's
money was awaiting this philanthropic buccaneer. Vulgar
ostentation was the outward badge of these civic burglaries.
Tweed moved into a Fifth Avenue mansion and gave his daughter a
wedding at which she received $100,000 worth of gifts; her
wedding dress was a $5000 creation. At Greenwich he built a
country estate where the stables were framed of choice mahogany.
Sweeny hobnobbed with Jim Fiske of the Erie, the Tweed of Wall
Street, who went about town dressed in loud checks and lived with
his harem in his Opera House on Eighth Avenue.

Thoughtful citizens saw these things going on and believed the
city was being robbed, but they could not prove it. There were
two attacking parties, however, who did not wait for proofs--
Thomas Nast, the brilliant cartoonist of Harper's Weekly, and the
New York Times. The incisive cartoons of Nast appealed to the
imaginations of all classes; even Tweed complained that his
illiterate following could "look at the damn pictures." The
trenchant editorials of Louis L. Jennings in the Times reached a
thoughtful circle of readers. In one of these editorials,
February 24, 1871, before the exposure, he said: "There is
absolutely nothing--nothing in the city--which is beyond the
reach of the insatiable gang who have obtained possession of it.
They can get a grand jury dismissed at any time, and, as we have
seen, the legislature is completely at their disposal."

Finally proof did come and, as is usual in such cases, it came
from the inside. James O'Brien, an ex-sheriff and the leader in a
Democratic "reform movement" calling itself "Young Democracy,"
secured the appointment of one of his friends as clerk in the
controller's office. Transcripts of the accounts were made, and
these O'Brien brought to the Times, which began their
publication, July 8, 1871. The Ring was in consternation. It
offered George Jones, the proprietor of the Times, $5,000,000 for
his silence and sent a well-known banker to Nast with an
invitation to go to Europe "to study art," with $100,000 for
"expenses."

"Do you think I could get $200,000?" innocently asked Nast.

"I believe from what I have heard in the bank that you might get
it."

After some reflection, the cartoonist asked: "Don't you think I
could get $500,000 to make that trip?"

"You can; you can get $500,000 in gold to drop this Ring business
and get out of the country."

"Well, I don't think I'll do it," laughed the artist. "I made up
my mind not long ago to put some of those fellows behind the
bars, and I am going to put them there."

"Only be careful, Mr. Nast, that you do not first put yourself in
a coffin," said the banker as he left.

A public meeting in Cooper Institute, April 6, 1871, was
addressed by William E. Dodge, Henry Ward Beecher, William M.
Evarts, and William F. Havemeyer. They vehemently denounced Tweed
and his gang. Tweed smiled and asked, "Well, what are you going
to do about it?" On the 4th of September, the same year, a second
mass meeting held in the same place answered the question by
appointing a committee of seventy. Tweed, Sweeny, and Hall, now
alarmed by the disclosures in the Times, decided to make Connolly
the scapegoat, and asked the aldermen and supervisors to appoint
a committee to examine his accounts. By the time the committee
appeared for the examination--its purpose had been well
announced--the vouchers for 1869 and 1870 had disappeared. Mayor
Hall then asked for Connolly's resignation. But instead, Connolly
consulted Samuel J. Tilden, who advised him to appoint Andrew H.
Green, a well-known and respected citizen, as his deputy. This
turned the tables on the three other members of the Ring, whose
efforts to oust both Connolly and Green were unavailing. In this
manner the citizens got control of the treasury books, and the
Grand Jury began its inquisitions. Sweeny and Connolly soon fled
to Europe. Sweeny afterwards settled for $400,000 and returned.
Hall's case was presented to a grand jury which proved to be
packed. A new panel was ordered but failed to return an
indictment because of lack of evidence. Hall was subsequently
indicted, but his trial resulted in a disagreement.

Tweed was indicted for felony. He remained at large on bail and
was twice tried in 1873. The first trial resulted in a
disagreement, the second in a conviction. His sentence was a fine
of $12,000 and twelve years' imprisonment. When he arrived at the
penitentiary, he answered the customary questions. "What
occupation?" "Statesman." "What religion?" "None." He served one
year and was then released on a flimsy technicality by the Court
of Appeals. Civil suits were now brought, and, unable to obtain
the $3,000,000 bail demanded, the fallen boss was sent to jail.
He escaped to Cuba, and finally to Spain, but he was again
arrested, returned to New York on a man-of-war, and put into
Ludlow Street jail, where he died April 12, 1878, apparently
without money or friends.

The exact amount of the plunder was never ascertained. An expert
accountant employed by the housecleaners estimated that for three
years, 1868-71, the frauds totaled between $45,000,000 and
$50,000,000. The estimate of the aldermen's committee was
$60,000,000. Tweed never gave any figures; he probably had never
counted his gains, but merely spent them as they came. O'Rourke,
one of the gang, estimated that the Ring stole about $75,000,000
during 1865-71, and that, "counting vast issues of fraudulent
bonds," the looting "probably amounted to $200,000,000."

The story of these disclosures circled the earth and still
affects the popular judgment of the American metropolis. It
seemed as though Tammany were forever discredited. But, to the
despair of reformers, in 1874 Tammany returned to power, electing
its candidate for mayor by over 9000 majority. The new boss who
maneuvered this rapid resurrection was John Kelly, a stone-mason,
known among his Irish followers as "Honest John." Besides the
political probity which the occasion demanded, he possessed a
capacity for knowing men and sensing public opinion. This enabled
him to lift the prostrate organization. He persuaded such men as
Samuel J. Tilden, the distinguished lawyer, August Belmont, a
leading financier, Horatio Seymour, who had been governor, and
Charles O'Conor, the famous advocate, to become sachems under
him. This was evidence of reform from within. Cooperation with
the Bar Association, the Taxpayers' Association, and other
similar organizations evidenced a desire of reform from without.
Kelly "bossed" the Hall until his death, June 1, 1886.

He was succeeded by Richard Croker, a machinist, prizefighter,
and gang-leader. Croker began his official career as a court
attendant under the notorious Judge Barnard and later was an
engineer in the service of the city. These places he held by
Tammany favor, and he was so useful that in 1868 he was made
alderman. A quarrel with Tweed lost him the place, but a
reconciliation soon landed him in the lucrative office of
Superintendent of Market Fees and Rents, under Connolly. In 1873
he was elected coroner and ten years later was appointed fire
commissioner. His career as boss was marked by much political
cleverness and caution and by an equal degree of moral
obtuseness.

The triumph of Tammany in 1892 was followed by such ill-disguised
corruption that the citizens of New York were again roused from
their apathy. The investigations of the Fassett Committee of the
State Senate two years previously had shown how deep the
tentacles of Tammany were thrust into the administrative
departments of the city. The Senate now appointed another
investigating committee, of which Clarence Lexow was the chairman
and John W. Goff the counsel. The Police Department came under
its special scrutiny. The disclosures revealed the connivance of
the police in stupendous election frauds. The President of the
Police Board himself had distributed at the polls the policemen
who committed these frauds. It was further revealed that vice and
crime under police protection had been capitalized on a great
scale. It was worth money to be a policeman. One police captain
testified he had paid $15,000 for his promotions; another paid
$12,000. It cost $300 to be appointed patrolman. Over six hundred
policy-shops were open, each paying $1500 a month for protection;
pool rooms paid $300 a month; bawdy-houses, from $25 to $50 per
month per inmate. And their patrons paid whatever they could be
blackmailed out of; streetwalkers, whatever they could be
wheedled out of; saloons, $20 per month; pawnbrokers, thieves,
and thugs shared with the police their profits, as did
corporations and others seeking not only favors but their rights.
The committee in its statement to the Grand Jury (March, 1892)
estimated that the annual plunder from these sources was over
$7,000,000.

During the committee's sessions Croker was in Europe on important
business. But he found time to order the closing of disreputable
resorts, and, though he was only a private citizen and three
thousand miles away, his orders were promptly obeyed.

Aroused by these disclosures and stimulated by the lashing
sermons of the Rev. Charles H. Parkhurst, the citizens of New
York, in 1894, elected a reform government, with William L.
Strong as Mayor. His administration set up for the metropolis a
new standard of city management. Colonel George E. Waring
organized, for the first time in the city's history, an efficient
streetcleaning department. Theodore Roosevelt was appointed
Police Commissioner. These men and their associates gave to New
York a period of thrifty municipal housekeeping.

But the city returned to its filth. After the incorporation of
Greater New York and the election of Robert A. Van Wyck as its
mayor, the great beast of Tammany arose and extended its eager
claws over the vast area of the new city.

The Mazet Committee was appointed by the legislature in 1899 to
investigate rumors of renewed corruption. But the inquiry which
followed was not as penetrating nor as free from partizan bias as
thoughtful citizens wished. The principal exposure was of the Ice
Trust, an attempt to monopolize the city's ice supply, in which
city officials were stockholders, the mayor to the extent of 5000
shares, valued at $500,000. It was shown, too, that Tammany
leaders were stockholders in corporations which received favors
from the city. Governor Roosevelt, however, refused to remove
Mayor Van Wyck because the evidence against him was insufficient.

The most significant testimony before the Mazet Committee was
that given by Boss Croker himself. His last public office had
been that of City Chamberlain, 1889-90, at a salary of $25,000.
Two years later he purchased for $250,000 an interest in a
stock-farm and paid over $100,000 for some noted race-horses. He
spent over half a million dollars on the English racetrack in
three years and was reputed a millionaire, owning large blocks of
city real estate. He told the committee that he virtually
determined all city nominations; and that all candidates were
assessed, even judicial candidates, from $10,000 to $25,000 for
their nominations. "We try to have a pretty effective
organization--that's what we are there for," he explained. "We
are giving the people pure organization government," even though
the organizing took "a lot of time" and was "very hard work."
Tammany members stood by one another and helped each other, not
only in politics but in business. "We want the whole business
[city business] if we can get it." If "we win, we expect everyone
to stand by us." Then he uttered what must have been to every
citizen of understanding a self-evident truth, "I am working for
my pockets all the time."

Soon afterwards Croker retired to his Irish castle, relinquishing
the leadership to Charles Murphy, the present boss. The growing
alertness of the voters, however, makes Murphy's task a more
difficult one than that of any of his predecessors. It is
doubtful if the nature of the machine has changed during all the
years of its history. Tweed and Croker were only natural products
of the system. They typify the vulgar climax of organized
looting.

In 1913 the Independent Democrats, Republicans, and Progressives
united in a fusion movement. They nominated and, after a most
spirited campaign, elected John Purroy Mitchel as mayor. He was a
young man, not yet forty, had held important city offices, and
President Wilson had appointed him Collector of the Port of New
York. His experience, his vigor, ability, and straightdealing
commended him to the friends of good government, and they were
not disappointed. The Mitchel regime set a new record for clean
and efficient municipal administration. Men of high character and
ability were enlisted in public service, and the Police
Department, under Commissioner Woods, achieved a new usefulness.
The decent citizens, not alone in the metropolis, but throughout
the country, believed with Theodore Roosevelt that Mr. Mitchel
was "the best mayor New York ever had." But neither the
effectiveness of his administration nor the combined efforts of
the friends of good government could save him from the designs of
Tammany Hall when, in 1917, he was a candidate for reelection.
Through a tactical blunder of the Fusionists, a small Republican
group was permitted to control the party primaries and nominate a
candidate of its own; the Socialists, greatly augmented by
various pacifist groups, made heavy inroads among the
foreign-born voters. And, while the whole power and finesse of
Tammany were assiduously undermining the mayor's strength,
ethnic, religious, partizan, and geographical prejudices combined
to elect the machine candidate, Judge Hylan, a comparatively
unknown Brooklyn magistrate.

How could Tammany regain its power, and that usually within two
years, after such disclosures as we have seen? The main reason is
the scientific efficiency of the organization. The victory of
Burr in New York in 1800 was the first triumph of the first ward
machine in America, and Tammany has forgotten neither this
victory nor the methods by which it was achieved. The
organization which was then set in motion has simply been
enlarged to keep easy pace with the city's growth. There are, in
fact, two organizations, Tammany Hall, the political machine, and
Tammany Society, the "Columbian Order" organized by Mooney, which
is ruled by sachems elected by the members. Both organizations,
however, are one in spirit. We need concern ourselves only with
the organization of Tammany Hall.

The framework of Tammany Hall's machinery has always been the
general committee, still known, in the phraseology of Burr's day,
as "the Democratic-Republican General Committee." It is a very
democratic body composed of representatives from every assembly
district, apportioned according to the number of voters in the
district. The present apportionment is one committeeman for every
fifteen votes. This makes a committee of over 9000, an unwieldy
number. It is justified, however, on two very practical grounds:
first, that it is large enough to keep close to the voters; and
second, that its assessment of ten dollars a member brings in
$90,000 a year to the war chest. This general committee holds
stated meetings and appoints subcommittees. The executive
committee, composed of the leaders of the assembly districts and
the chairman and treasurer of the county committee, is the real
working body of the great committee. It attends to all important
routine matters, selects candidates for office, and conducts
their campaigns. It is customary for the members of the general
committee to designate the district leaders for the executive
committee, but they are elected by their own districts
respectively at the annual primary elections. The district leader
is a very important wheel in the machine. He not only leads his
district but represents it on the executive committee; and this
brotherhood of leaders forms the potent oligarchy of Tammany. Its
sanction crowns the high chieftain, the boss, who, in turn, must
be constantly on the alert that his throne is not undermined;
that is to say, he and his district leaders must "play politics"
within their own bailiwicks to keep their heads on their own
shoulders. After their enfranchisement in New York (1917) women
were made eligible to the general and executive committees.
Thirty-seven were at once elected to the executive committee, and
plans were made to give them one-half of the representation on
the general committee.

Each of the twenty-three assembly districts is in turn divided
into election districts of about 400 voters, each with a
precinct captain who is acquainted with every voter in his
precinct and keeps track, as far as possible, of his affairs. In
every assembly district there are headquarters and a club house,
where the voters can go in the evening and enjoy a smoke, a
bottle, and a more or less quiet game.

This organization is never dormant. And this is the key to its
vitality. There is no mystery about it. Tammany is as vigilant
between elections as it is on election day. It has always been
solicitous for the poor and the humble, who most need and best
appreciate help and attention. Every poor immigrant is welcomed,
introduced to the district headquarters, given work, or food, or
shelter. Tammany is his practical friend; and in return he is
merely to become naturalized as quickly as possible under the
wardship of a Tammany captain and by the grace of a Tammany
judge, and then to vote the Tammany ticket. The new citizen's
lessons in political science are all flavored with highly
practical notions.

Tammany's machinery enables a house-to-house canvass to be made
in one day. But this machinery must be oiled. There are three
sources of the necessary lubricant: offices, jobs, the sale of
favors; these are dependent on winning the elections. From its
very earliest days, fraud at the polls has been a Tammany
practice. As long as property qualifications were required, money
was furnished for buying houses which could harbor a whole
settlement of voters. It was not, however, until the adoption of
universal suffrage that wholesale frauds became possible or
useful; for with a limited suffrage it was necessary to sway only
a few score votes to carry an ordinary election.

Fernando Wood set a new pace in this race for votes. It has been
estimated that in 1854 there "were about 40,000 shiftless,
unprincipled persons who lived by their wits and the labor of
others. The trade of a part of these was turning primary
elections, packing nominating conventions, repeating, and
breaking up meetings." Wood also systematized naturalization. A
card bearing the following legend was the open sesame to American
citizenship:

"Common Pleas:
 Please naturalize the bearer.
 N. Seagrist, Chairman."

Seagrist was one of the men charged by an aldermanic committee
"with robbing the funeral pall of Henry Clay when his sacred
person passed through this city."

When Hoffman was first elected mayor, over 15,000 persons were
registered who could not be found at the places indicated. The
naturalization machinery was then running at high speed. In 1868,
from 25,000 to 30,000 foreigners were naturalized in New York in
six weeks. Of 156,288 votes cast in the city, 25,000 were
afterwards shown to be fraudulent. It was about this time that an
official whose duty it was to swear in the election inspectors,
not finding a Bible at hand, used a volume of Ollendorf's "New
Method of Learning to Read, Write, and Speak French." The courts
sustained this substitution on the ground that it could not
possibly have vitiated the election!

A new federal naturalization law and rigid election laws have
made wholesale frauds impossible; and the genius of Tammany is
now attempting to adjust itself to the new immigration, the new
political spirit, and the new communal vigilance. Its power is
believed by some optimistic observers to be waning. But the
evidences are not wanting that its vitality and internal
discipline are still persistent.



CHAPTER VI. LESSER OLIGARCHIES

New York City is not unique in its experience with political
bossdom. Nearly every American city, in a greater or less degree,
for longer or shorter periods, has been dominated by oligarchies.

Around Philadelphia, American sentiment has woven the memories of
great events. It still remains, of all our large cities, the most
"American." It has fewer aliens than any other, a larger
percentage of home owners, a larger number of small tradespeople
and skilled artisans--the sort of population which democracy
exalts, and who in turn are presumed to be the bulwark of
democracy. These good citizens, busied with the anxieties and
excitements of their private concerns, discovered, in the decade
following the Civil War, that their city had slipped unawares
into the control of a compact oligarchy, the notorious Gas Ring.
The city government at this time was composed of thirty-two
independent boards and departments, responsible to the council,
but responsible to the council in name only and through the
medium of a council committee. The coordinating force, the
political gravitation which impelled all these diverse boards and
council committees to act in unison, was the Gas Department. This
department was controlled by a few designing and capable
individuals under the captaincy of James McManes. They had
reduced to political servitude all the employees of the
department, numbering about two thousand. Then they had extended
their sway over other city departments, especially the police
department. Through the connivance of the police and control over
the registration of voters, they soon dominated the primaries and
the nominating conventions. They carried the banner of the
Republican party, the dominant party in Philadelphia and in the
State, under which they more easily controlled elections, for the
people voted "regular." Then every one of the city's servants was
made to pay to the Gas Ring money as well as obeisance.
Tradespeople who sold supplies to the city, contractors who did
its work, saloon-keepers and dive-owners who wanted
protection--all paid. The city's debt increased at the rate of
$3,000,000 a year, without visible evidence of the application of
money to the city's growing needs.

In 1883 the citizens finally aroused themselves and petitioned
the legislature for a new charter. They confessed: "Philadelphia
is now recognized as the worst paved and worst cleaned city in
the civilized world. The water supply is so bad that during many
weeks of the last winter it was not only distasteful and
unwholesome for drinking, but offensive for bathing purposes. The
effort to clean the streets was abandoned for months and no
attempt was made to that end until some public-spirited citizens,
at their own expense, cleaned a number of the principal
thoroughfares . . . . The physical condition of the sewers" is
"dangerous to the health and most offensive to the comfort of our
people. Public work has been done so badly that structures have
to be renewed almost as soon as finished. Others have been in
part constructed at enormous expense and then permitted to fall
to decay without completion." This is a graphic and faithful
description of the result which follows government of the Ring,
for the Ring, with the people's money. The legislature in 1885
granted Philadelphia a new charter, called the Bullitt Law, which
went into effect in 1887, and which greatly simplified the
structure of the government and centered responsibility in the
mayor. It was then necessary for the Ring to control primaries
and win elections in order to keep the city within its clutches.
So began in Philadelphia the practice of fraudulent registering
and voting on a scale that has probably never been equaled
elsewhere in America. Names taken from tombstones in the
cemeteries and from the register of births found their way to the
polling registers. Dogs, cats, horses, anything living or dead,
with a name, served the purpose.

The exposure of these frauds was undertaken in 1900 by the
Municipal League. In two wards, where the population had
decreased one per cent in ten years (1890-1900), it was found
that the registered voters had increased one hundred per cent.
From one house sixty-two voters were registered, of sundry
occupations as follows: "Professors, bricklayers, gentlemen,
moulders, cashiers, barbers, ministers, bakers, doctors, drivers,
bartenders, plumbers, clerks, cooks, merchants, stevedores,
bookkeepers, waiters, florists, boilermakers, salesmen, soldiers,
electricians, printers, book agents, and restaurant keepers." One
hundred and twenty-two voters, according to the register, lived
at another house, including nine agents, nine machinists, nine
gentlemen, nine waiters, nine salesmen, four barbers, four
bakers, fourteen clerks, three laborers, two bartenders, a
milkman, an optician, a piano-mover, a window-cleaner, a nurse,
and so on.

On the day before the election the Municipal League sent
registered letters to all the registered voters of certain
precincts. Sixty-three per cent were returned, marked by the
postman, "not at," "deceased," "removed," "not known." Of
forty-four letters addressed to names registered from one
four-story house, eighteen were returned. From another house,
supposed to be sheltering forty-eight voters, forty-one were
returned; from another, to which sixty-two were sent, sixty-one
came back. The league reported that "two hundred and fifty-two
votes were returned in a division that had less than one hundred
legal voters within its boundaries." Repeating and ballot-box
stuffing were common. Election officers would place fifty or more
ballots in the box before the polls opened or would hand out a
handful of ballots to the recognized repeaters. The high-water
mark of boss rule was reached under Mayor Ashbridge,
"Stars-and-Stripes Sam," who had been elected in 1899. The
moderation of Martin, who had succeeded McManes as boss, was cast
aside; the mayor was himself a member of the Ring. When Ashbridge
retired, the Municipal League reported: "The four years of the
Ashbridge administration have passed into history leaving behind
them a scar on the fame and reputation of our city which will be
a long time healing. Never before, and let us hope never again,
will there be such brazen defiance of public opinion, such
flagrant disregard of public interest, such abuse of power and
responsibility for private ends."

Since that time the fortunes of the Philadelphia Ring have
fluctuated. Its hold upon the city, however, is not broken, but
is still strong enough to justify Owen Wister's observation: "Not
a Dickens, only a Zola, would have the face (and the stomach) to
tell the whole truth about Philadelphia."

St. Louis was one of the first cities of America to possess the
much-coveted home rule. The Missouri State Constitution of 1875
granted the city the power to frame its own charter, under
certain limitations. The new charter provided for a mayor elected
for four years with the power of appointing certain heads of
departments; others, however, were to be elected directly by the
people. It provided for a Municipal Assembly composed of two
houses: the Council, with thirteen members, elected at large for
four years, and the House of Delegates, with twenty-eight
members, one from each ward, elected for two years. These two
houses were given coordinate powers; one was presumed to be a
check on the other. The Assembly fixed the tax rate, granted
franchises, and passed upon all public improvements. The Police
Department was, however, under the control of the mayor and four
commissioners, the latter appointed by the Governor. The city was
usually Republican by about 8000 majority; the State was safely
Democratic. The city, until a few years ago, had few tenements
and a small floating population.

Outwardly, all seemed well with the city until 1901, when the
inside workings of its government were revealed to the public
gaze through the vengeance of a disappointed franchise-seeker.
The Suburban Railway Company sought an extension of its
franchises. It had approached the man known as the dispenser of
such favors, but, thinking his price ($145,000) too high, had
sought to deal directly with the Municipal Assembly. The price
agreed upon for the House of Delegates was $75,000; for the
Council, $60,000. These sums were placed in safety vaults
controlled by a dual lock. The representative of the Company held
one of the keys; the representative of the Assembly, the other;
so that neither party could take the money without the presence
of both. The Assembly duly granted the franchises; but property
owners along the line of the proposed extension secured an
injunction, which delayed the proceedings until the term of the
venal House of Delegates had expired. The Assemblymen, having
delivered the goods, demanded their pay. The Company, held up by
the courts, refused. Mutterings of the disappointed conspirators
reached the ear of an enterprising newspaper reporter. Thereby
the Circuit Attorney, Joseph W. Folk, struck the trail of the
gang. Both the president of the railway company and the "agent"
of the rogues of the Assembly turned state's evidence; the
safe-deposit boxes were opened, disclosing the packages
containing one hundred and thirty-five $1000 bills.

This exposure led to others--the "Central Traction Conspiracy,"
the "Lighting Deal," the "Garbage Deal." In the cleaning-up
process, thirty-nine persons were indicted, twenty-four for
bribery and fifteen for perjury.

The evidence which Folk presented in the prosecution of these
scoundrels merely confirmed what had long been an unsavory rumor:
that franchises and contracts were bought and sold like
merchandise; that the buyers were men of eminence in the city's
business affairs; and that the sellers were the people's
representatives in the Assembly. The Grand Jury reported: "Our
investigation, covering more or less fully a period of ten years
shows that, with few exceptions, no ordinance has been passed
wherein valuable privileges or franchises are granted until those
interested have paid the legislators the money demanded for
action in the particular case . . . . So long has this practice
existed that such members have come to regard the receipt of
money for action on pending measures as a legitimate perquisite
of a legislator."

These legislators, it appeared from the testimony, had formed a
water-tight ring or "combine" in 1899, for the purpose of
systematizing this traffic. A regular scale of prices was
adopted: so much for an excavation, so much per foot for a
railway switch, so much for a street pavement, so much for a
grain elevator. Edward R. Butler was the master under whose
commands for many years this trafficking was reduced to
systematic perfection. He had come to St. Louis when a young man,
had opened a blacksmith shop, had built up a good trade in
horseshoeing, and also a pliant political following in his ward.
His attempt to defeat the home rule charter in 1876 had given him
wider prominence, and he soon became the boss of the Democratic
machine. His energy, shrewdness, liberality, and capacity for
friendship gave him sway over both Republican and Democratic
votes in certain portions of the city. A prominent St. Louis
attorney says that for over twenty years "he named candidates on
both tickets, fixed, collected, and disbursed campaign
assessments, determined the results in elections, and in fine,
practically controlled the public affairs of St. Louis." He was
the agent usually sought by franchise-seekers, and he said that
had the Suburban Company dealt with him instead of with the
members of the Assembly, they might have avoided exposure. He was
indicted four times in the upheaval, twice for attempting to
bribe the Board of Health in the garbage deal--he was a
stockholder in the company seeking the contract--and twice for
bribery in the lighting contract.

Cincinnati inherited from the Civil War the domestic excitements
and political antagonisms of a border city. Its large German
population gave it a conservative political demeanor, slow to
accept changes, loyal to the Republican party as it was to the
Union. This reduced partizan opposition to a docile minority,
willing to dicker for public spoils with the intrenched majority.

George B. Cox was for thirty years the boss of this city. Events
had prepared the way for him. Following closely upon the war, Tom
Campbell, a crafty criminal lawyer, was the local leader of the
Republicans, and John R. McLean, owner of the Cincinnati
Enquirer, a very rich man, of the Democrats. These two men were
cronies: they bartered the votes of their followers. For some
years crime ran its repulsive course: brawlers, thieves,
cutthroats escaped conviction through the defensive influence of
the lawyer-boss. In 1880, Cox, who had served an apprenticeship
in his brother-in-law's gambling house, was elected to the city
council. Thence he was promoted to the decennial board of
equalization which appraised all real estate every ten years.
There followed a great decrease in the valuation of some of the
choicest holdings in the city. In 1884 there were riots in
Cincinnati. After the acquittal of two brutes who had murdered a
man for a trifling sum of money, exasperated citizens burned the
criminal court house. The barter in justice stopped, but the
barter in offices and in votes continued. The Blaine campaign
then in progress was in great danger. Cox, already a master of
the political game, promised the Republican leaders that if they
would give him a campaign fund he would turn in a Republican
majority from Cincinnati. He did; and for many years thereafter
the returns from Hamilton County, in which Cincinnati is
situated, brought cheer to Republican State headquarters on
election night.

Cox was an unostentatious, silent man, giving one the impression
of sullenness, and almost entirely lacking in those qualities of
comradeship which one usually seeks in the "Boss" type. From a
barren little room over the "Mecca" saloon, with the help of a
telephone, he managed his machine. He never obtruded himself upon
the public. He always remained in the background. Nor did he ever
take vast sums. Moderation was the rule of his loot.

By 1905 a movement set in to rid the city of machine rule. Cox
saw this movement growing in strength. So he imported boatloads
of floaters from Kentucky. These floaters registered "from dives,
and doggeries, from coal bins and water closets; no space was too
small to harbor a man." For once he threw prudence to the winds.
Exposure followed; over 2800 illegal voters were found. The
newspapers, so long docile, now provided the necessary publicity.
A little paper, the Citizen's Bulletin, which had started as a
handbill of reform, when all the dailies seemed closed to the
facts, now grew into a sturdy weekly. And, to add the capstone to
Cox's undoing, William H. Taft, the most distinguished son of
Cincinnati, then Secretary of War in President Roosevelt's
cabinet, in a campaign speech in Akron, Ohio, advised the
Republicans to repudiate him. This confounded the "regulars," and
Cox was partially beaten. The reformers elected their candidate
for mayor, but the boss retained his hold on the county and the
city council. And, in spite of all that was done, Cox remained an
influence in politics until his death, May 20, 1916.

San Francisco has had a varied and impressive political
experience. The first legislature of California incorporated the
mining town into the city of San Francisco, April 15, 1850. Its
government from the outset was corrupt and inefficient.
Lawlessness culminated in the murder of the editor of the
Bulletin, J. King of William, on May 14, 1856, and a vigilance
committee was organized to clean up the city, and watch the
ballot-box on election day.

Soon the legislature was petitioned to change the charter. The
petition recites: "Without a change in the city government which
shall diminish the weight of taxation, the city will neither be
able to discharge the interest on debts already contracted, nor
to meet the demands for current disbursements . . . . The present
condition of the streets and public improvements of the city
abundantly attest the total inefficiency of the present system."

The legislature passed the "Consolidation Act," and from 1856 to
1900 county and city were governed as a political unit. At first
the hopes for more frugal government seemed to be fulfilled. But
all encouraging symptoms soon vanished. Partizan rule followed,
encouraged by the tinkering of the legislature, which imposed on
the charter layer upon layer of amendments, dictated by partizan
craft, not by local needs. The administrative departments were
managed by Boards of Commissioners, under the dictation of "Blind
Boss Buckley," who governed his kingdom for many years with the
despotic benevolence characteristic of his kind. The citizens saw
their money squandered and their public improvements lagging. It
took twenty-five years to complete the City Hall, at a cost of
$5,500,000. An official of the Citizens' Non-partizan party, in
1895, said: "There is no city in the Union with a quarter of a
million people, which would not be the better for a little
judicious hanging."

The repeated attempts made by citizens of San Francisco to get a
new charter finally succeeded, and in 1900 the city hopefully
entered a new epoch under a charter of its own making which
contained several radical changes. Executive responsibility was
centered in the mayor, fortified by a comprehensive civil
service. The foundations were laid for municipal ownership of
public utilities, and the initiative and referendum were adopted
for all public franchises. The legislative power was vested in a
board of eighteen supervisors elected at large.

No other American city so dramatically represents the futility of
basing political optimism on a mere plan. It was only a step from
the mediocrity enthroned by the first election under the new
charter to the gross inefficiency and corruption of a new ring,
under a new boss. A Grand Jury (called the "Andrews Jury") made a
report indicating that the administration was trafficking in
favors sold to gamblers, prize-fighters, criminals, and the whole
gamut of the underworld; that illegal profits were being reaped
from illegal contracts, and that every branch of the executive
department was honeycombed with corruption. The Grand Jury
believed and said all this, but it lacked the legal proof upon
which Mayor Schmitz and his accomplices could be indicted. In
spite of this report, Schmitz was reelected in 1905 as the
candidate of the Labor-Union party.

Now graft in San Francisco became simply universal. George
Kennan, summarizing the practices of the looters, says they "took
toll everywhere from everybody and in almost every imaginable
way: they went into partnership with dishonest contractors; sold
privileges and permits to business men; extorted money from
restaurants and saloons; levied assessments on municipal
employees; shared the profits of houses of prostitution; forced
beer, whiskey, champagne, and cigars on restaurants and saloons
on commission; blackmailed gamblers, pool-sellers, and promoters
of prize-fights; sold franchises to wealthy corporations; created
such municipal bureaus as the commissary department and the city
commercial company in order to make robbery of the city more
easy; leased rooms and buildings for municipal offices at
exorbitant rates, and compelled the lessees to share profits;
held up milkmen, kite-advertisers, junk-dealers, and even
street-sweepers; and took bribes from everybody who wanted an
illegal privilege and was willing to pay for it. The motto of the
administration seemed to be 'Encourage dishonesty, and then let
no dishonest dollar escape.'"

The machinery through which this was effected was simple: the
mayor had vast appointing powers and by this means directly
controlled all the city departments. But the mayor was only an
automaton. Back of him was Abe Ruef, the Boss, an unscrupulous
lawyer who had wormed his way into the labor party, and
manipulated the "leaders" like puppets. Ruef's game also was
elementary. He sold his omnipotence for cash, either under the
respectable cloak of "retainer" or under the more common device
of commissions and dividends, so that thugs retained him for
their freedom, contractors for the favors they expected, and
public service corporations for their franchises.

Finally, through the persistence of a few private citizens, a
Grand Jury was summoned. Under the foremanship of B. P. Oliver it
made a thorough investigation. Francis J. Heney was employed as
special prosecutor and William J. Burns as detective. Heney and
Burns formed an aggressive team. The Ring proved as vulnerable as
it was rotten. Over three hundred indictments were returned,
involving persons in every walk of life. Ruef was sentenced to
fourteen years in the penitentiary. Schmitz was freed on a
technicality, after being found guilty and sentenced to five
years. Most of the other indictments were not tried, the
prosecutor's attention having been diverted to the trail of the
franchise-seekers, who have thus far eluded conviction.

Minneapolis, a city blending New England traditions with
Scandinavian thrift, illustrates, in its experiences with "Doc"
Ames, the maneuvers of the peripatetic boss. Ames was four times
mayor of the city, but never his own successor. Each succeeding
experience with him grew more lurid of indecency, until his third
term was crystallized in Minneapolis tradition as "the notorious
Ames administration." Domestic scandal made him a social outcast,
political corruption a byword, and Ames disappeared from public
view for ten years.

In 1900 a new primary law provided the opportunity to return him
to power for the fourth time. Ames, who had been a Democrat, now
found it convenient to become a Republican. The new law, like
most of the early primary laws, permitted members of one party to
vote in the primaries of the other party. So Ames's following,
estimated at about fifteen hundred, voted in the Republican
primaries, and he became a regular candidate of that party in a
presidential year, when citizens felt the special urge to vote
for the party.

Ames was the type of boss with whom discipline is secondary to
personal aggrandizement. He had a passion for popularity; was
imposing of presence; possessed considerable professional skill;
and played constantly for the support of the poor. The attacks
upon him he turned into political capital by saying that he was
made a victim by the rich because he championed the poor.
Susceptible to flattery and fond of display, he lacked the power
to command. He had followers, not henchmen. His following was
composed of the lowly, who were duped by his phrases, and of
criminals, who knew his bent; and they followed him into any
party whither he found it convenient to go, Republican,
Democratic, or Populist.

The charter of Minneapolis gave the mayor considerable appointing
power. He was virtually the dictator of the Police Department.
This was the great opportunity of Ames and his floating vote. His
own brother, a weak individual with a dubious record, was made
Chief of Police. Within a few weeks about one-half of the police
force was discharged, and the places filled with men who could be
trusted by the gang. The number of detectives was increased and
an ex-gambler placed at their head. A medical student from Ames's
office was commissioned a special policeman to gather loot from
the women of the street.

Through a telepathy of their own, the criminal classes all over
the country soon learned of the favorable conditions in
Minneapolis, under which every form of gambling and low vice
flourished; and burglars, pickpockets, safe-blowers, and harlots
made their way thither. Mr. W. A. Frisbie, the editor of a
leading Minneapolis paper, described the situation in the
following words: "It is no exaggeration to say that in this
period fully 99% of the police department's efficiency was
devoted to the devising and enforcing of blackmail. Ordinary
patrolmen on beats feared to arrest known criminals for fear the
prisoners would prove to be 'protected'. . . .The horde of
detective favorites hung lazily about police headquarters,
waiting for some citizen to make complaint of property stolen,
only that they might enforce additional blackmail against the
thief, or possibly secure the booty for themselves. One detective
is now [1903] serving time in the state prison for retaining a
stolen diamond pin."

The mayor thought he had a machine for grinding blackmail from
every criminal operation in his city, but he had only a gang,
without discipline or coordinating power, and weakened by
jealousy and suspicion. The wonder is that it lasted fifteen
months. Then came the "April Grand Jury," under the foremanship
of a courageous and resourceful business man. The regime of
criminals crumbled; forty-nine indictments, involving twelve
persons, were returned.

The Grand Jury, however, at first stood alone in its
investigations. The crowd of politicians and vultures were
against it, and no appropriations were granted for getting
evidence. So its members paid expenses out of their own pockets,
and its foreman himself interviewed prisoners and discovered the
trail that led to the Ring's undoing. Ames's brother was
convicted on second trial and sentenced to six and a half years
in the penitentiary, while two of his accomplices received
shorter terms. Mayor Ames, under indictment and heavy bonds, fled
to Indiana.

The President of the City Council, a business man of education,
tact, and sincerity, became mayor, for an interim of four months;
enough time, as it proved, for him to return the city to its
normal political life.

These examples are sufficient to illustrate the organization and
working of the municipal machine. It must not be imagined by the
reader that these cities alone, and a few others made notorious
by the magazine muck-rakers, are the only American cities that
have developed oligarchies. In truth, not a single American city,
great or small, has entirely escaped, for a greater or lesser
period, the sway of a coterie of politicians. It has not always
been a corrupt sway; but it has rarely, if ever, given efficient
administration.

Happily there are not wanting signs that the general conditions
which have fostered the Ring are disappearing. The period of
reform set in about 1890, when people began to be interested in
the study of municipal government. It was not long afterwards
that the first authoritative books on the subject appeared. Then
colleges began to give courses in municipal government; editors
began to realize the public's concern in local questions and to
discuss neighborhood politics as well as national politics. By
1900 a new era broke--the era of the Grand Jury. Nothing so
hopeful in local politics had occurred in our history as the
disclosures which followed. They provoked the residuum of
conscience in the citizenry and the determination that honesty
should rule in public business and politics as well as in private
transactions. The Grand Jury inquisitions, however, demonstrated
clearly that the criminal law was no remedy for municipal
misrule. The great majority of floaters and illegal voters who
were indicted never faced a trial jury. The results of the
prosecutions for bribery and grosser political crimes were
scarcely more encouraging. It is true that one Abe Ruef in a
California penitentiary is worth untold sermons, editorials, and
platform admonitions, and serves as a potent warning to all
public malefactors. Yet the example is soon forgotten; and the
people return to their former political habits.

But out of this decade of gang-hunting and its impressive
experiences with the shortcomings of our criminal laws came the
new municipal era which we have now fully entered, the era of
enlightened administration. This new era calls for a
reconstruction of the city government. Its principal feature is
the rapid spread of the Galveston or Commission form of
government and of its modification, the City Manager plan, the
aim of which is to centralize governmental authority and to
entice able men into municipal office. And there are many other
manifestations of the new civic spirit. The mesmeric influence of
national party names in civic politics is waning; the rise of
home rule for the city is severing the unholy alliance between
the legislature and the local Ring; the power to grant franchises
is being taken away from legislative bodies and placed directly
with the people; nominations are passing out of the hands of
cliques and are being made the gift of the voters through
petitions and primaries; efficient reforms in the taxing and
budgetary machinery have been instituted, and the development of
the merit system in the civil service is creating a class of
municipal experts beyond the reach of political gangsters.

There have sprung up all sorts of collateral organizations to
help the officials: societies for municipal research, municipal
reference libraries, citizens' unions, municipal leagues, and
municipal parties. These are further supplemented by
organizations which indirectly add to the momentum of practical,
enlightened municipal sentiment: boards of commerce, associations
of business and professional men of every variety, women's clubs,
men's clubs, children's clubs, recreation clubs, social clubs,
every one with its own peculiar vigilance upon some corner of the
city's affairs. So every important city is guarded by a network
of voluntary organizations.

All these changes in city government, in municipal laws and
political mechanisms, and in the people's attitude toward their
cities, have tended to dignify municipal service. The city job
has been lifted to a higher plane. Lord Rosebery, the brilliant
chairman of the first London County Council, the governing body
of the world's largest city, said many years ago: "I wish that my
voice could extend to every municipality in the kingdom, and
impress upon every man, however high his position, however great
his wealth, however consummate his talents may be, the importance
and nobility of municipal work." It is such a spirit as this that
has made the government of Glasgow a model of democratic
efficiency; and it is the beginnings of this spirit that the
municipal historian finds developing in the last twenty years of
American life. It is indeed difficult to see how our cities can
slip back again into the clutches of bosses and rings and repeat
the shameful history of the last decades of the nineteenth
century.



CHAPTER VII. LEGISLATIVE OMNIPOTENCE

The American people, when they wrote their first state
constitutions, were filled with a profound distrust of executive
authority, the offspring of their experience with the arbitrary
King George. So they saw to it that the executive authority in
their own government was reduced to its lowest terms, and that
the legislative authority, which was presumed to represent the
people, was exalted to legal omnipotence. In the original States,
the legislature appointed many of the judicial and administrative
officers; it was above the executive veto; it had political
supremacy; it determined the form of local governments and
divided the State into election precincts; it appointed the
delegates to the Continental Congress, towards which it displayed
the attitude of a sovereign. It was altogether the most important
arm of the state government; in fact it virtually was the state
government. The Federal Constitution created a government of
specified powers, reserving to the States all authority not
expressly given to the central government. Congress can legislate
only on subjects permitted by the Constitution; on the other
hand, a state legislature can legislate on any subject not
expressly forbidden. The state legislature possesses authority
over a far wider range of subjects than Congress--subjects,
moreover, which press much nearer to the daily activities of the
citizens, such as the wide realm of private law, personal
relations, local government, and property.

In the earlier days, men of first-class ability, such as
Alexander Hamilton, Samuel Adams, and James Madison, did not
disdain membership in the state legislatures. But the development
of party spirit and machine politics brought with it a great
change. Then came the legislative caucus; and party politics soon
reigned in every capital. As the legislature was ruled by the
majority, the dominant party elected presiding officers,
designated committees, appointed subordinates, and controlled
lawmaking. The party was therefore in a position to pay its
political debts and bestow upon its supporters valuable favors.
Further, as the legislature apportioned the various electoral
districts, the dominant party could, by means of the gerrymander,
entrench itself even in unfriendly localities. And, to crown its
political power, it elected United States Senators. But, as the
power of the party increased, unfortunately the personnel of the
legislature deteriorated. Able men, as a rule, shunned a service
that not only took them from their private affairs for a number
of months, but also involved them in partizan rivalries and
trickeries. Gradually the people came to lose confidence in the
legislative body and to put their trust more in the Executive or
else reserved governmental powers to themselves. It was about
1835 that the decline of the legislature's powers set in, when
new state constitutions began to clip its prerogatives, one after
another.

The bulky constitutions now adopted by most of the States are
eloquent testimony to the complete collapse of the legislature as
an administrative body and to the people's general distrust of
their chosen representatives. The initiative, referendum, recall,
and the withholding of important subjects from the legislature's
power, are among the devices intended to free the people from the
machinations of their wilful representatives.

Now, most of the evils which these heroic measures have sought to
remedy can be traced directly to the partizan ownership of the
state legislature. The boss controlling the members of the
legislature could not only dole out his favors to the privilege
seekers; he could assuage the greed of the municipal ring; and
could, to a lesser degree, command federal patronage by an
entente cordiale with congressmen and senators; and through his
power in presidential conventions and elections he had a direct
connection with the presidential office itself.

It was in the days before the legislature was prohibited from
granting, by special act, franchises and charters, when banks,
turnpike companies, railroads, and all sorts of corporations came
asking for charters, that the figure of the lobbyist first
appeared. He acted as a middleman between the seeker and the
giver. The preeminent figure of this type in state and
legislative politics for several decades preceding the Civil War
was Thurlow Weed of New York. As an influencer of legislatures,
he stands easily first in ability and achievement. His great
personal attractions won him willing followers whom he knew how
to use. He was party manager, as well as lobbyist and boss in a
real sense long before that term was coined. His capacity for
politics amounted to genius. He never sought office; and his
memory has been left singularly free from taint. He became the
editor of the Albany Journal and made it the leading Whig
"up-state" paper. His friend Seward, whom he had lifted into the
Governor's chair, passed on to the United States Senate; and when
Horace Greeley with the New York Tribune joined their forces,
this potent triumvirate ruled the Empire State. Greeley was its
spokesman, Seward its leader, but Weed was its designer. From his
room No. 11 in the old Astor House, he beckoned to forces that
made or unmade presidents, governors, ambassadors, congressmen,
judges, and legislators.

With the tremendous increase of business after the Civil War, New
York City became the central office of the nation's business, and
many of the interests centered there found it wise to have
permanent representatives at Albany to scrutinize every bill that
even remotely touched their welfare, to promote legislation that
was frankly in their favor, and to prevent "strikes"--the bills
designed for blackmail. After a time, however, the number of
"strikes" decreased, as well as the number of lobbyists attending
the session. The corporate interests had learned efficiency.
Instead of dealing with legislators individually, they arranged
with the boss the price of peace or of desirable legislation. The
boss transmitted his wishes to his puppets. This form of
government depends upon a machine that controls the legislature.
In New York both parties were moved by machines. "Tom" Platt was
the "easy boss" of the Republicans; and Tammany and its
"up-state" affiliations controlled the Democrats. "Right here,"
says Platt in his Autobiography (1910), "it may be appropriate to
say that I have had more or less to do with the organization of
the New York legislature since 1873." He had. For forty years he
practically named the Speaker and committees when his party won,
and he named the price when his party lost. All that an
"interest" had to do, under the new plan, was to "see the boss,"
and the powers of government were delivered into its lap.

Some of this legislative bargaining was revealed in the insurance
investigation of 1905, conducted by the Armstrong Committee with
Charles E. Hughes as counsel. Officers of the New York Life
Insurance Company testified that their company had given $50,000
to the Republican campaign of 1904. An item of $235,000,
innocently charged to "Home office annex account," was traced to
the hands of a notorious lobbyist at Albany. Three insurance
companies had paid regularly $50,000 each to the Republican
campaign fund. Boss Platt himself was compelled reluctantly to
relate how he had for fifteen years received ten one thousand
dollar bundles of greenbacks from the Equitable Life as
"consideration" for party goods delivered. John A. McCall,
President of the New York Life, said: "I don't care about the
Republican side of it or the Democratic side of it. It doesn't
count at all with me. What is best for the New York Life moves
and actuates me."

In another investigation Mr. H. O. Havemeyer of the Sugar Trust
said: "We have large interests in this State; we need police
protection and fire protection; we need everything that the city
furnishes and gives, and we have to support these things. Every
individual and corporation and firm--trust or whatever you call
it--does these things and we do them." No distinction is made,
then, between the government that ought to furnish this
"protection" and the machine that sells it!

No episode in recent political history shows better the relations
of the legislature to the political machine and the great power
of invisible government than the impeachment and removal of
Governor William Sulzer in 1913. Sulzer had been four times
elected to the legislature. He served as Speaker in 1893. He was
sent to Congress by an East Side district in New York City in
1895 and served continuously until his nomination for Governor of
New York in 1912. All these years he was known as a Tammany man.
During his campaign for Governor he made many promises for
reform, and after his election he issued a bombastic declaration
of independence. His words were discounted in the light of his
previous record. Immediately after his inauguration, however, he
began a house-cleaning. He set to work an economy and efficiency
commission; he removed a Tammany superintendent of prisons; made
unusually good appointments without paying any attention to the
machine; and urged upon the legislature vigorous and vital laws.

But the Tammany party had a large working majority in both
houses, and the changed Sulzer was given no support. The crucial
moment came when an emasculated primary law was handed to him for
his signature. An effective primary law had been a leading
campaign issue, all the parties being pledged to such an
enactment. The one which the Governor was now requested to sign
had been framed by the machine to suit its pleasure. The Governor
vetoed it. The legislature adjourned on the 3rd of May. The
Governor promptly reconvened it in extra session (June 7th) for
the purpose of passing an adequate primary law. Threats that had
been made against him by the machine now took form. An
investigating committee, appointed by the Senate to examine the
Governor's record, largely by chance happened upon "pay dirt,"
and early on the morning of the 13th of August, after an
all-night session, the Assembly passed a motion made by its
Tammany floor leader to impeach the Governor.

The articles of impeachment charged: first, that the Governor had
filed a false report of his campaign expenses; second, that since
he had made such statement under oath he was guilty of perjury;
third, that he had bribed witnesses to withhold testimony from
the investigating committee; fourth, that he had used threats in
suppression of evidence before the same tribunal; fifth, that he
had persuaded a witness from responding to the committee's
subpoena; sixth, that he had used campaign contributions for
private speculation in the stock market; seventh, that he had
used his power as Governor to influence the political action of
certain officials; lastly, that he had used this power for
affecting the stock market to his gain.

Unfortunately for the Governor, the first, second, and sixth
charges had a background of facts, although the rest were
ridiculous and trivial. By a vote of 43 to 12 he was removed from
the governorship. The proceeding was not merely an impeachment of
New York's Governor. It was an impeachment of its government.
Every citizen knew that if Sulzer had obeyed Murphy, his
shortcomings would never have been his undoing.

The great commonwealth of Pennsylvania was for sixty years under
the domination of the House of Cameron and the House of Quay.
Simon Cameron's entry into public notoriety was symbolic of his
whole career. In 1838, he was one of a commission of two to
disburse to the Winnebago Indians at Prairie du Chien $100,000 in
gold. But, instead of receiving gold, the poor Indians received
only a few thousand dollars in the notes of a bank of which
Cameron was the cashier. Cameron was for this reason called "the
Great Winnebago." He built a large fortune by canal and railway
contracts, and later by rolling-mills and furnaces. He was one
of the first men in American politics to purchase political power
by the lavish use of cash, and to use political power for the
gratification of financial greed. In 1857 he was elected to the
United States Senate as a Republican by a legislature in which
the Democrats had a majority. Three Democrats voted for him, and
so bitter was the feeling against the renegade trio that no hotel
in Harrisburg would shelter them.

In 1860 he was a candidate for the Republican presidential
nomination. President Lincoln made him Secretary of War. But his
management was so ill-savored that a committee of leading
business men from the largest cities of the country told the
President that it was impossible to transact business with such a
man. These complaints coupled with other considerations moved
Lincoln to dismiss Cameron. He did so in characteristic fashion.
On January 11, 1862, he sent Cameron a curt note saying that he
proposed to appoint him minister to Russia. And thither into
exile Cameron went. A few months later, the House of
Representatives passed a resolution of censure, citing Cameron's
employment of irresponsible persons and his purchase of supplies
by private contract instead of competitive bidding. The
resolution, however, was later expunged from the records; and
Cameron, on his return from Russia, again entered the Senate
under circumstances so suspicious that only the political
influence of the boss thwarted an action for bribery. In 1877 he
resigned, naming as his successor his son "Don," who was promptly
elected.

In the meantime another personage had appeared on the scene.
"Cameron made the use of money an essential to success in
politics, but Quay made politics expensive beyond the most
extravagant dreams." From the time he arrived of age until his
death, with the exception of three or four years, Matthew S. Quay
held public office. When the Civil War broke out, he had been for
some time prothonotary of Beaver County, and during the war he
served as Governor Curtin's private secretary. In 1865 he was
elected to the legislature. In 1877 he induced the legislature to
resurrect the discarded office of Recorder of Philadelphia, and
for two years he collected the annual fees of $40,000. In 1887 he
was elected to the United States Senate, in which he remained
except for a brief interval until his death.

In 1899 came revelations of Quay's substantial interests in state
moneys. The suicide of the cashier of the People's Bank of
Philadelphia, which was largely owned by politicians and was a
favorite depository of state funds, led to an investigation of
the bank's affairs, and disclosed the fact that Quay and some of
his associates had used state funds for speculation. Quay's
famous telegram to the cashier was found among the dead
official's papers, "If you can buy and carry a thousand Met. for
me I will shake the plum tree."

Quay was indicted, but escaped trial by pleading the statute of
limitations as preventing the introduction of necessary evidence
against him. A great crowd of shouting henchmen accosted him as a
hero when he left the courtroom, and escorted him to his hotel.
And the legislature soon thereafter elected him to his third term
in the Senate.

Pittsburgh, as well as Philadelphia, had its machine which was
carefully geared to Quay's state machine. The connection was made
clear by the testimony of William Flinn, a contractor boss,
before a committee of the United States Senate. Flinn explained
the reason for a written agreement between Quay on the one hand
and Flinn and one Brown in behalf of Chris Magee, the Big Boss,
on the other, for the division of the sovereignty of western
Pennsylvania. "Senator Quay told me," said Flinn, "that he would
not permit us to elect the Republican candidate for mayor in
Pittsburgh unless we adjust the politics to suit him." The
people evidently had nothing to say about it.

The experiences of New York and Pennsylvania are by no means
isolated; they are illustrative. Very few States have escaped a
legislative scandal. In particular, Rhode Island, Delaware,
Illinois, Colorado, Montana, California, Ohio, Mississippi, Texas
can give pertinent testimony to the willingness of legislatures
to prostitute their great powers to the will of the boss or the
machine.



CHAPTER VIII. THE NATIONAL HIERARCHY

American political maneuver culminates at Washington. The
Presidency and membership in the Senate and the House of
Representatives are the great stakes. By a venerable tradition,
scrupulously followed, the judicial department is kept beyond the
reach of party greed.

The framers of the Constitution believed that they had contrived
a method of electing the President and Vice-President which would
preserve the choice from partizan taint. Each State should choose
a number of electors "equal to the whole number of Senators and
Representatives to which the State may be entitled in the
Congress." These electors were to form an independent body, to
meet in their respective States and "ballot for two persons," and
send the result of their balloting to the Capitol, where the
President of the Senate, in the presence of the Senate and the
House of Representatives, opened the certificates and counted the
votes. The one receiving the greatest number of votes was to be
declared elected President, the one receiving the next highest
number of votes, Vice-President. George Washington was the only
President elected by such an autonomous group. The election of
John Adams was bitterly contested, and the voters knew, when they
were casting their ballots in 1796, whether they were voting for
a Federalist or a Jeffersonian. From that day forward this
greatest of political prizes has been awarded through partizan
competition. In 1804 the method of selecting the Vice-President
was changed by the twelfth constitutional amendment. The electors
since that time ballot for President and Vice-President. Whatever
may be the legal privileges of the members of the Electoral
College, they are considered, by the voters, as agents of the
party upon whose tickets their names appear, and to abuse this
relationship would universally be deemed an act of perfidy.

The Constitution permits the legislatures of the States to
determine how the electors shall be chosen. In the earlier
period, the legislatures elected them; later they were elected by
the people; sometimes they were elected at large, but usually
they were chosen by districts. And this is now the general
custom. Since the development of direct nominations, there has
been a strong movement towards the abolition of the Electoral
College and the election of the President by direct vote.

The President is the most powerful official in our government and
in many respects he is the most powerful ruler in the world. He
is Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Navy. His is virtually the
sole responsibility in conducting international relations. He is
at the head of the civil administration and all the important
administrative departments are answerable to him. He possesses a
vast power of appointment through which he dispenses political
favors. His wish is potent in shaping legislation and his veto is
rarely overridden. With Congress he must be in daily contact; for
the Senate has the power of ratifying or discarding his
appointments and of sanctioning or rejecting his treaties with
foreign countries; and the House of Representatives originates
all money bills and thus possesses a formidable check upon
executive usurpation.

The Constitution originally reposed the choice of United States
Senators with the state legislatures. A great deal of virtue was
to flow from such an indirect election. The members of the
legislature were presumed to act with calm judgment and to choose
only the wise and experienced for the dignity of the toga. And
until the period following the Civil War the great majority of
the States delighted to send their ablest statesmen to the
Senate. Upon its roll we find the names of many of our
illustrious orators and jurists. After the Civil War, when the
spirit of commercialism invaded every activity, men who were
merely rich began to aspire to senatorial honors. The debauch of
the state legislatures which was revealed in the closing year of
the nineteenth century and the opening days of the twentieth so
revolted the people that the seventeenth constitutional amendment
was adopted (1913) providing for the election of senators by
direct vote.

The House of Representatives was designed to be the "popular
house." Its election from small districts, by direct vote, every
two years is a guarantee of its popular character. From this
characteristic it has never departed. It is the People's House.
It originates all revenue measures. On its floor, in the rough
and tumble of debate, partizan motives are rarely absent.

Upon this national tripod, the Presidency, the Senate, and the
House, is builded the vast national party machine. Every citizen
is familiar with the outer aspect of these great national parties
as they strive in placid times to create a real issue of the
tariff, or imperialism, or what not, so as to establish at least
an ostensible difference between them; or as they, in critical
times, make the party name synonymous with national security. The
high-sounding platforms, the frenzied orators, the parades, mass
meetings, special trains, pamphlets, books, editorials,
lithographs, posters--all these paraphernalia are conjured up in
the voter's mind when he reads the words Democratic and
Republican.

But, from the standpoint of the professional politician, all this
that the voter sees is a mask, the patriotic veneer to hide the
machine, that complex hierarchy of committees ranging from
Washington to every cross-roads in the Republic. The committee
system, described in a former chapter, was perfected by the
Republican party during the days of the Civil War, under the
stress of national necessity. The great party leaders were then
in Congress. When the assassination of Lincoln placed Andrew
Johnson in power, the bitter quarrel between Congress and the
President firmly united the Republicans; and in order to carry
the mid-election in 1866, they organized a Congressional Campaign
Committee to conduct the canvass. This practice has been
continued by both parties, and in "off" years it plays a very
prominent part in the party campaign. Congress alone, however,
was only half the conquest. It was only through control of the
Administration that access was gained to the succulent herbage of
federal pasturage and that vast political prestige with the voter
was achieved.

The President is nominally the head of his party. In reality he
may not be; he may be only the President. That depends upon his
personality, his desires, his hold upon Congress and upon the
people, and upon the circumstances of the hour. During the Grant
Administration, as already described, there existed, in every
sense of the term, a federal machine. It held Congress, the
Executive, and the vast federal patronage in its power. All the
federal office-holders, all the postmasters and their assistants,
revenue collectors, inspectors, clerks, marshals, deputies,
consuls, and ambassadors were a part of the organization,
contributing to its maintenance. We often hear today of the
"Federal Crowd," a term used to describe such appointees as still
subsist on presidential and senatorial favor. In Grant's time,
this "crowd" was a genuine machine, constructed, unlike some of
its successors, from the center outward. But the "boss" of this
machine was not the President. It was controlled by a group of
leading Congressmen, who used their power for dictating
appointments and framing "desirable" legislation. Grant, in the
imagination of the people, symbolized the cause their sacrifices
had won; and thus his moral prestige became the cloak of the
political plotters.

A number of the ablest men in the Republican party, however,
stood aloof; and by 1876 a movement against the manipulators had
set in. Civil service reform had become a real issue. Hayes, the
"dark horse" who was nominated in that year, declared, in
accepting the nomination, that "reform should be thorough,
radical, and complete." He promised not to be a candidate for a
second term, thus avoiding the temptation, to which almost every
President has succumbed, of using the patronage to secure his
reelection. The party managers pretended not to hear these
promises. And when Hayes, after his inauguration, actually began
to put them into force, they set the whole machinery of the party
against the President. Matters came to a head when the President
issued an order commanding federal office-holders to refrain from
political activity. This order was generally defied, especially
in New York City in the post-office and customs rings. Two
notorious offenders, Cornell and Arthur, were dismissed from
office by the President. But the Senate, influenced by Roscoe
Conkling's power, refused to confirm the President's new
appointees; and under the Tenure of Office Act, which had been
passed to tie President Johnson's hands, the offenders remained
in office over a year. The fight disciplined the President and
the machine in about equal proportions. The President became more
amenable and the machine less arbitrary.

President Garfield attempted the impossible feat of obliging both
the politicians and the reformers. He was persuaded to make
nominations to federal offices in New York without consulting
either of the senators from that State, Conkling and Platt.
Conkling appealed to the Senate to reject the New York appointees
sent in by the President. The Senate failed to sustain him.
Conkling and his colleague Platt resigned from the Senate and
appealed to the New York legislature, which also refused to
sustain them.

While this absurd farce was going on, a more serious ferment was
brewing. On July 2, 1881, President Garfield was assassinated by
a disappointed office-seeker named Guiteau. The attention of the
people was suddenly turned from the ridiculous diversion of the
Conkling incident to the tragedy and its cause. They saw the
chief office in their gift a mere pawn in the game of
place-seekers, the time and energy of their President wasted in
bickerings with congressmen over petty appointments, and the
machinery of their Government dominated by the machinery of the
party for ignoble or selfish ends.

At last the advocates of reform found their opportunity. In 1883
the Civil Service Act was passed, taking from the President about
14,000 appointments. Since then nearly every President, towards
the end of his term, especially his second term, has added to the
numbers, until nearly two-thirds of the federal offices are now
filled by examination. President Cleveland during his second term
made sweeping additions. President Roosevelt found about 100,000
in the classified service and left 200,000. President Taft,
before his retirement, placed in the classified service assistant
postmasters and clerks in first and second-class postoffices,
about 42,000 rural delivery carriers, and over 20,000 skilled
workers in the navy yards.

The appointing power of the President, however, still remains the
principal point of his contact with the machine. He has, of
course, other means of showing partizan favors. Tariff laws, laws
regulating interstate commerce, reciprocity treaties, "pork
barrels," pensions, financial policies, are all pregnant with
political possibilities.

The second official unit in the national political hierarchy is
the House of Representatives, controlling the pursestrings, which
have been the deadly noose of many executive measures. The House
is elected every two years, so that it may ever be "near to the
people"! This produces a reflex not anticipated by the Fathers of
the Constitution. It gives the representative brief respite from
the necessities of politics, and hence little time for the
necessities of the State.

The House attained the zenith of its power when it arraigned
President Johnson at the bar of the Senate for high crimes and
misdemeanors in office. It had shackled his appointing power by
the Tenure of Office Act; it had forced its plan of
reconstruction over his veto; and now it led him, dogged and
defiant, to a political trial. Within a few years the character
of the House changed. A new generation interested in the issues
of prosperity, rather than those of the war, entered public life.
The House grew unwieldy in size and its business increased
alarmingly. The minority, meanwhile, retained the power, through
filibustering, to hold up the business of the country.

It was under such conditions that Speaker Reed, in 1890, crowned
himself "Czar" by compelling a quorum. This he did by counting as
actually present all members whom the clerk reported as "present
but not voting." The minority fought desperately for its last
privilege and even took a case to the Supreme Court to test the
constitutionality of a law passed by a Reed-made quorum. The
court concurred with the sensible opinion of the country that
"when the quorum is present, it is there for the purpose of doing
business," an opinion that was completely vindicated when the
Democratic minority became a majority and adopted the rule for
its own advantage.

By this ruling, the Speakership was lifted to a new eminence. The
party caucus, which nominated the Speaker, and to which momentous
party questions were referred, gave solidarity to the party. But
the influence of the Speaker, through his power of appointing
committees, of referring bills, of recognizing members who wished
to participate in debate, insured that discipline and centralized
authority which makes mass action effective. The power of the
Speaker was further enlarged by the creation of the Rules
Committee, composed of the Speaker and two members from each
party designated by him. This committee formed a triumvirate (the
minority members were merely formal members) which set the limits
of debate, proposed special rules for such occasions as the
committee thought proper, and virtually determined the destiny of
bills. So it came about, as Bryce remarks, that the choice of the
Speaker was "a political event of the highest significance."

It was under the regency of Speaker Cannon that the power of the
Speaker's office attained its climax. The Republicans had a large
majority in the House and the old war-horses felt like colts.
They assumed their leadership, however, with that obliviousness
to youth which usually characterizes old age. The gifted and
attractive Reed had ruled often by aphorism and wit, but the
unimaginative Cannon ruled by the gavel alone; and in the course
of time he and his clique of veterans forgot entirely the
difference between power and leadership.

Even party regularity could not long endure such tyranny. It was
not against party organization that the insurgents finally raised
their lances, but against the arbitrary use of the machinery of
the organization by a small group of intrenched "standpatters."
The revolt began during the debate on the Payne-Aldrich tariff,
and in the campaign of 1908 "Cannonism" was denounced from the
stump in every part of the country. By March, 1910, the
insurgents were able, with the aid of the Democrats, to amend the
rules, increasing the Committee on Rules to ten to be elected by
the House and making the Speaker ineligible for membership. When
the Democrats secured control of the House in the following year,
the rules were revised, and the selection of all committees is
now determined by a Committee on Committees chosen in party
caucus. This change shifts arbitrary power from the shoulders of
the Speaker to the shoulders of the party chieftains. The power
of the Speaker has been lessened but by no means destroyed. He is
still the party chanticleer.

The political power of the House, however, cannot be calculated
without admitting to the equation the Senate, the third official
unit, and, indeed, the most powerful factor in the national
hierarchy. The Senate shares equally with the House the
responsibility of lawmaking, and shares with the President the
responsibility of appointments and of treaty-making. It has been
the scene of many memorable contests with the President for
political control. The senators are elder statesmen, who have
passed through the refining fires of experience, either in law,
business, or politics. A senator is elected for six years; so
that he has a period of rest between elections, in which he may
forget his constituents in the ardor of his duties.

Within the last few decades a great change has come over the
Senate, over its membership, its attitude towards public
questions, and its relation to the electorate. This has been
brought about through disclosures tending to show the relations
on the part of some senators towards "big business." As early as
the Granger revelations of railway machinations in politics, in
the seventies, a popular distrust of the Senate became
pronounced. No suggestion of corruption was implied, but certain
senators were known as "railway senators," and were believed to
use their partizan influence in their friends' behalf. This
feeling increased from year to year, until what was long
suspected came suddenly to light, through an entirely unexpected
agency. William Randolph Hearst, a newspaper owner who had in
vain attempted to secure a nomination for President by the
Democrats and to get himself elected Governor of New York, had
organized and financed a party of his own, the Independence
League. While speaking in behalf of his party, in the fall of
1908, he read extracts from letters written by an official of the
Standard Oil Company to various senators. The letters, it later
appeared, had been purloined from the Company's files by a
faithless employee. They caused a tremendous sensation. The
public mind had become so sensitive that the mere fact that an
intimacy existed between the most notorious of trusts and some
few United States senators--the correspondents called each other
"Dear John," "Dear Senator," etc.--was sufficient to arouse the
general wrath. The letters disclosed a keen interest on the part
of the corporation in the details of legislation, and the public
promptly took the Standard Oil Company as a type. They believed,
without demanding tangible proof, that other great corporations
were, in some sinister manner, influencing legislation.
Railroads, insurance companies, great banking concerns, vast
industrial corporations, were associated in the public mind as
"the Interests." And the United States Senate was deemed the
stronghold of the interests. A saturnalia of senatorial
muckraking now laid bare the "oligarchy," as the small group of
powerful veteran Senators who controlled the senatorial machinery
was called. It was disclosed that the centralization of
leadership in the Senate coincided with the centralization of
power in the Democratic and Republican national machines. In 1911
and 1912 a "money trust" investigation was conducted by the
Senate and a comfortable entente was revealed between a group of
bankers, insurance companies, manufacturers, and other interests,
carried on through an elaborate system of interlocking
directorates. Finally, in 1912, the Senate ordered its Committee
on Privileges and Elections to investigate campaign contributions
paid to the national campaign committees in 1904, 1908, and 1912.
The testimony taken before this committee supplied the country
with authentic data of the interrelations of Big Business and Big
Politics.

The revolt against "Cannonism" in the House had its counterpart
in the Senate. By the time the Aldrich tariff bill came to a vote
(1909), about ten Republican senators rebelled. The revolt
gathered momentum and culminated in 1912 in the organization of
the National Progressive party with Theodore Roosevelt as its
candidate for President and Hiram Johnson of California for Vice-
President. The majority of the Progressives returned to the
Republican fold in 1916. But the rupture was not healed, and the
Democrats reelected Woodrow Wilson.



CHAPTER IX. THE AWAKENING

In the early days a ballot was simply a piece of paper with the
names of the candidates written or printed on it. As party
organizations became more ambitious, the party printed its own
ballots, and "scratching" was done by pasting gummed stickers,
with the names of the substitutes printed on them, over the
regular ballot, or by simply striking out a name and writing
another one in its place. It was customary to print the different
party tickets on different colored paper, so that the judges in
charge of the ballot boxes could tell how the men voted. When
later laws required all ballots to be printed on white paper and
of the same size, the parties used paper of different texture.
Election officials could then tell by the "feel" which ticket was
voted. Finally paper of the same color and quality was enjoined
by some States. But it was not until the State itself undertook
to print the ballots that uniformity was secured.

In the meantime the peddling of tickets was a regular occupation
on election day. Canvassers invaded homes and places of business,
and even surrounded the voting place. It was the custom in many
parts of the country for the voters to prepare the ballots before
reaching the voting place and carry them in the vest pocket, with
a margin showing. This was a sort of signal that the voter's mind
had been made up and that he should be let alone, yet even with
this signal showing, in hotly contested elections the voter ran a
noisy gauntlet of eager solicitors, harassing him on his way to
vote as cab drivers assail the traveler when he alights from the
train. This free and easy method, tolerable in sparsely settled
pioneer districts, failed miserably in the cities. It was
necessary to pass rigorous laws against vote buying and selling,
and to clear the polling-place of all partizan soliciting. Penal
provisions were enacted against intimidation, violence,
repeating, false swearing when challenged, ballot-box stuffing,
and the more patent forms of partizan vices. In order to stop the
practice of "repeating," New York early passed laws requiring
voters to be duly registered. But the early laws were defective,
and the rolls were easily padded. In most of the cities poll
lists were made by the party workers, and the name of each voter
was checked off as he voted. It was still impossible for the
voter to keep secret his ballot. The buyer of votes could tell
whether he got what he paid for; the employer, so disposed, could
bully those dependent on him into voting as he wished, and the
way was open to all manner of tricks in the printing of ballots
with misleading emblems, or with certain names omitted, or with a
mixture of candidates from various parties--tricks that were
later forbidden by law but were none the less common.

Rather suddenly a great change came over election day. In 1888
Kentucky adopted the Australian ballot for the city of
Louisville, and Massachusetts adopted it for all state and local
elections. The Massachusetts statute provided that before an
election each political party should certify its nominees to the
Secretary of the Commonwealth. The State then printed the
ballots. All the nominees of all the parties were printed on one
sheet. Each office was placed in a separate column, the
candidates in alphabetical order, with the names of the parties
following. Blank spaces were left for those who wished to vote
for others than the regular nominees. This form of ballot
prevented "voting straight" with a single mark. The voter, in the
seclusion of a booth at the polling-place, had to pick his
party's candidates from the numerous columns.

Indiana, in 1889, adopted a similar statute but the ballot had
certain modifications to suit the needs of party orthodoxy. Here
the columns represented parties, not offices. Each party had a
column. Each column was headed by the party name and its device,
so that those who could not read could vote for the Rooster or
the Eagle or the Fountain. There was a circle placed under the
device, and by making his mark in this circle the voter voted
straight.

Within eight years thirty-eight States and two Territories had
adopted the Australian or blanket ballot in some modified form.
It was but a step to the state control of the election machinery.
Some state officer, usually the Secretary of State, was
designated to see that the election laws were enforced. In New
York a State Commissioner of Elections was appointed. The
appointment of local inspectors and judges remained for a time in
the hands of the parties. But soon in several States even this
power was taken from them, and the trend now is towards
appointing all election officers by the central authority. These
officers also have complete charge of the registration of voters.
In some States, like New York, registration has become a rather
solemn procedure, requiring the answering of many questions and
the signing of the voter's name, all under the threat of perjury
if a wilful misrepresentation is made.

So passed out of the control of the party the preparation of the
ballot and the use of the ballot on election day. Innumerable
rules have been laid down by the State for the conduct of
elections. The distribution of the ballots, their custody before
election, the order of electional procedure, the counting of the
ballots, the making of returns, the custody of the ballot-boxes,
and all other necessary details, are regulated by law under
official state supervision. The parties are allowed watchers at
the polls, but these have no official standing.

If a Revolutionary Father could visit his old haunts on election
day, he would be astonished at the sober decorum. In his time
elections lasted three days, days filled with harangue, with
drinking, betting, raillery, and occasional encounters. Even
those whose memory goes back to the Civil War can contrast the
ballot peddling, the soliciting, the crowded noisy
polling-places, with the calm and quiet with which men deposit
their ballots today. For now every ballot is numbered and no one
is permitted to take a single copy from the room. Every voter
must prepare his ballot in the booth. And every polling-place is
an island of immunity in the sea of political excitement.

While the people were thus assuming control of the ballot, they
were proceeding to gain control of their legislatures. In 1890
Massachusetts enacted one of the first anti-lobby laws. It has
served as a model for many other States. It provided that the
sergeant-at-arms should keep dockets in which were enrolled the
names of all persons employed as counsel or agents before
legislative committees. Each counsel or agent was further
compelled to state the length of his engagement, the subjects or
bills for which he was employed, and the name and address of his
employer.

The first session after the passage of this law, many of the
professional lobbyists refused to enroll, and the most notorious
ones were seen no more in the State House. The regular counsel of
railroads, insurance companies, and other interests signed the
proper docket and appeared for their clients in open committee
meetings.

The law made it the duty of the Secretary of the Commonwealth to
report to the law officers of the State, for prosecution, all
those who failed to comply with the act. Sixty-seven such
delinquents were reported the first year. The Grand Jury refused
to indict them, but the number of recalcitrants has gradually
diminished.

The experience of Massachusetts is not unique. Other States
passed more or less rigorous anti-lobby laws, and today, in no
state Capitol, will the visitor see the disgusting sights that
were usual thirty years ago--arrogant and coarse professional
"agents" mingling on the floor of the legislature with members,
even suggesting procedure to presiding officers, and not
infrequently commandeering a majority. Such influences, where
they persist, have been driven under cover.

With the decline of the professional lobbyist came the rise of
the volunteer lobbyist. Important bills are now considered in
formal committee hearings which are well advertised so that
interested parties may be present. Publicity and information have
taken the place of secrecy in legislative procedure. The
gathering of expert testimony by special legislative commissions
of inquiry is now a frequent practice in respect to subjects of
wide social import, such as workmen's compensation, widows'
pensions, and factory conditions.

A number of States have resorted to the initiative and referendum
as applied to ordinary legislation. By means of this method a
small percentage of the voters, from eight to ten per cent, may
initiate proposals and impose upon the voters the function of
legislation. South Dakota, in 1898, made constitutional provision
for direct legislation. Utah followed in 1900, Oregon in 1902,
Nevada in 1904, Montana in 1906, and Oklahoma in 1907. East of
the Mississippi, several States have adopted a modified form of
the initiative and referendum. In Oregon, where this device of
direct government has been most assiduously applied, the voters
in 1908 voted upon nineteen different bills and constitutional
amendments; in 1910 the number increased to thirty-two; in 1912,
to thirty-seven; in 1914 it fell to twenty-nine. The vote cast
for these measures rarely exceeded eighty per cent of those
voting at the election and frequently fell below sixty.

The electorate that attempts to rid itself of the evils of the
state legislature by these heroic methods assumes a heavy
responsibility. When the burden of direct legislation is added to
the task of choosing from the long list of elective officers
which is placed before the voter at every local and state
election, it is not surprising that there should set in a
reaction in favor of simplified government. The mere separation
of state and local elections does not solve the problem. It
somewhat minimizes the chances of partizan influence over the
voter in local elections; but the voter is still confronted with
the long lists of candidates for elective offices. Ballots not
infrequently contain two hundred names, sometimes even three
hundred or more, covering candidates of four or five parties for
scores of offices. These blanket ballots are sometimes three feet
long. After an election in Chicago in 1916, one of the leading
dailies expressed sympathy "for the voter emerging from the
polling-booth, clutching a handful of papers, one of them about
half as large as a bed sheet." Probably most voters were able to
express a real preference among the national candidates. It is
almost equally certain that most voters were not able to express
a real preference among important local administrative officials.
A huge ballot, all printed over with names, supplemented by a
series of smaller ballots, can never be a manageable instrument
even for an electorate as intelligent as ours.

Simplification is the prophetic watchword in state government
today. For cities, the City Manager and the Commission have
offered salvation. A few officers only are elected and these are
held strictly responsible, sometimes under the constant threat of
the recall, for the entire administration. Over four hundred
cities have adopted the form of government by Commission. But
nothing has been done to simplify our state governments, which
are surrounded by a maze of heterogeneous and undirected boards
and authorities. Every time the legislature found itself
confronted by a new function to be cared for, it simply created a
new board. New York has a hodgepodge of over 116 such
authorities; Minnesota, 75; Illinois, 100. Iowa in 1913 and
Illinois and Minnesota in 1914, indeed, perfected elaborate
proposals for simplifying their state governments. But these
suggestions remain dormant. And the New York State Constitutional
Convention in 1915 prepared a new Constitution for the State,
with the same end in view, but their work was not accepted by the
people. It may be said, however, that in our attempt to rid
ourselves of boss rule we have swung through the arc of direct
government and are now on the returning curve toward
representative government, a more intensified representative
government that makes evasion of responsibility and duty
impossible by fixing it upon one or two men.



CHAPTER X. PARTY REFORM

The State, at first, had paid little attention to the party,
which was regarded as a purely voluntary aggregation of
like-minded citizens. Evidently the State could not dictate that
you should be a Democrat or a Republican or force you to be an
Independent. With the adoption of the Australian ballot, however,
came the legal recognition of the party; for as soon as the State
recognized the party's designated nominees in the preparation of
the official ballot, it recognized the party. It was then
discovered that, unless some restrictions were imposed, groups of
interested persons in the old parties would manage the
nominations of both to their mutual satisfaction. Thus a handful
of Democrats would visit Republican caucuses or primaries and a
handful of Republicans would return the favor to the Democrats.
In other words, the bosses of both parties would cooperate in
order to secure nominations satisfactory to themselves.
Massachusetts began the reform by defining a party as a group of
persons who had cast a certain percentage of the votes at the
preceding election. This definition has been widely accepted; and
the number of votes has been variously fixed at from two to
twenty-five per cent. Other States have followed the New York
plan of fixing definitely the number of voters necessary to form
a party. In New York no fewer than 10,000 voters can secure
recognition as a state party, exception being made in favor of
municipal or purely local parties. But merely fixing the
numerical minimum of the party was not enough. The State took
another step forward in depriving the manipulator of his liberty
when it undertook to determine who was entitled to membership in
the party and privileged to take part in its nominations and
other party procedure. Otherwise the virile minority in each
party would control both the membership and the nominations.

An Oregon statute declares: "Every political party and every
volunteer political organization has the same right to be
protected from the interference of persons who are not identified
with it, as its known and publicly avowed members, that the
government of the State has to protect itself from the
interference of persons who are not known and registered as its
electors. It is as great a wrong to the people, as well as to
members of a political party, for anyone who is not known to be
one of its members to vote or take any part at any election, or
other proceedings of such political party, as it is for one who
is not a qualified and registered elector to vote at any state
election or to take part in the business of the State." It is a
far reach from the democratic laissez faire of Jackson's day to
this state dogmatism which threatens the independent or detached
voter with ultimate extinction.

A variety of methods have been adopted for initiating the citizen
into party membership. In the Southern States, where the dual
party system does not exist, the legislature has left the matter
in the hands of the duly appointed party officials. They can,
with canonical rigor, determine the party standing of voters at
the primaries. But where there is party competition, such a
generous endowment of power would be dangerous.

Many States permit the voter to make his declaration of party
allegiance when he goes to the primary. He asks for the ticket of
the party whose nominees he wishes to help select. He is then
handed the party's ballot, which he marks and places in the
ballot-box of that party. Now, if he is challenged, he must
declare upon oath that he is a member of that party, that he has
generally supported its tickets and its principles, and that at
the coming election he intends to support at least a majority of
its nominees. In this method little freedom is left to the voter
who wishes to participate as an independent both in the primaries
and in the general election.

The New York plan is more rigorous. Here, in all cities, the
voter enrolls his name on his party's lists when he goes to
register for the coming election. He receives a ballot upon which
are the following words: "I am in general sympathy with the
principles of the party which I have designated by my mark
hereunder; it is my intention to support generally at the next
general election, state and national, the nominees of such party
for state and national offices; and I have not enrolled with or
participated in any primary election or convention of any other
party since the first day of last year." On this enrollment blank
he indicates the party of his choice, and the election officials
deposit all the ballots, after sealing them in envelopes, in a
special box. At a time designated by law, these seals are broken
and the party enrollment is compiled from them. These party
enrollment books are public records. Everyone who cares may
consult the lists. The advantages of secrecy--such as they
are--are thus not secured.

It remained for Wisconsin, the experimenting State, to find a way
of insuring secrecy. Here, when the voter goes to the primary, he
is handed a large ballot, upon which all the party nominations
are printed. The different party tickets are separated by
perforations, so that the voter simply tears out the party ticket
he wishes to vote, marks it, and puts it in the box. The rejected
tickets he deposits in a large waste basket provided for the
discards.

While the party was being fenced in by legal definition, its
machinery, the intricate hierarchy of committees, was subjected
to state scrutiny with the avowed object of ridding the party of
ring rule. The State Central Committee is the key to the
situation. To democratize this committee is a task that has
severely tested the ingenuity of the State, for the inventive
capacity of the professional politician is prodigious. The
devices to circumvent the politician are so numerous and various
that only a few types can be selected to illustrate how the State
is carrying out its determination. Illinois has provided perhaps
the most democratic method. In each congressional district, the
voters, at the regular party primaries, choose the member of the
state committee for the district, who serves for a term of two
years. The law says that "no other person or persons whomsoever"
than those so chosen by the voters shall serve on the committee,
so that members by courtesy or by proxy, who might represent the
boss, are apparently shut off. The law stipulates the time within
which the committee must meet and organize. Under this plan, if
the ring controls the committee, the fault lies wholly with the
majority of the party; it is a self-imposed thraldom.

Iowa likewise stipulates that the Central Committee shall be
composed of one member from each congressional district. But the
members are chosen in a state convention, organized under strict
and minute regulations imposed by law. It permits considerable
freedom to the committee, however, stating that it "may organize
at pleasure for political work as is usual and customary with
such committees."

In Wisconsin another plan was adopted in 1907. Here the
candidates for the various state offices and for both branches of
the legislature and the senators whose terms have not expired
meet in the state capital at noon on a day specified by law and
elect by ballot a central committee consisting of at least two
members from each congressional district. A chairman is chosen in
the same manner.

Most States, however, leave some leeway in the choice of the
state committee, permitting their election usually by the regular
primaries but controlling their action in many details. The
lesser committees--county, city, district, judicial, senatorial,
congressional, and others--are even more rigorously controlled by
law.

So the issuing of the party platform, the principles on which it
must stand or fall, has been touched by this process of
ossification. Few States retain the state convention in its
original vigor. In all States where primaries are held for state
nominations, the emasculated and subdued convention is permitted
to write the party platform. But not so in some States. Wisconsin
permits the candidates and the hold-over members of the Senate,
assembled according to law in a state meeting, to issue the
platform. In other States, the Central Committee and the various
candidates for state office form a party council and frame the
platform. Oregon, in 1901, tried a novel method of providing
platforms by referendum. But the courts declared the law
unconstitutional. So Oregon now permits each candidate to write
his own platform in not over one hundred words and file it with
his nominating petition, and to present a statement of not over
twelve words to be printed on the ballot.

The convention system provided many opportunities for the
manipulator and was inherently imperfect for nominating more than
one or two candidates for office. It has survived as the method
of nominating candidates for President of the United States
because it is adapted to the wide geographical range of the
nation and because in the national convention only a President
and a Vice-President are nominated. In state and county
conventions, where often candidates for a dozen or more offices
are to be nominated, it was often subject to demoralizing
bartering.

The larger the number of nominations to be made, the more
complete was the jobbery, and this was the death warrant of the
local convention. These evils were recognized as early as June
20, 1860, when the Republican county convention of Crawford
County, Pennsylvania, adopted the following resolutions:

"Whereas, in nominating candidates for the several county
offices, it clearly is, or ought to be, the object to arrive as
nearly as possible at the wishes of the majority, or at least a
plurality of the Republican voters; and

Whereas the present system of nominating by delegates, who
virtually represent territory rather than votes, and who almost
necessarily are wholly unacquainted with the wishes and feelings
of their constituents in regard to various candidates for office,
is undemocratic, because the people have no voice in it, and
objectionable, because men are often placed in nomination because
of their location who are decidedly unpopular, even in their own
districts, and because it affords too great an opportunity for
scheming and designing men to accomplish their own purposes;
therefore

Resolved, that we are in favor of submitting nominations directly
to the people--the Republican voters--and that delegate
conventions for nominating county officers be abolished, and we
hereby request and instruct the county committee to issue their
call in 1861, in accordance with the spirit of this resolution."

Upon the basis of this indictment of the county convention
system, the Republican voters of Crawford County, a rural
community, whose largest town is Meadville, the county seat,
proceeded to nominate their candidates by direct vote, under
rules prepared by the county committee. These rules have been but
slightly changed. The informality of a hat or open table drawer
has been replaced by an official ballotbox, and an official
ballot has taken the place of the tickets furnished by each
candidate.

The "Crawford County plan," as it was generally called, was
adopted by various localities in many States. In 1866 California
and New York enacted laws to protect primaries and nominating
caucuses from fraud. In 1871 Ohio and Pennsylvania enacted
similar laws, followed by Missouri in 1875 and New Jersey in
1878. By 1890 over a dozen States had passed laws attempting to
eliminate the grosser frauds attendant upon making nominations.
In many instances it was made optional with the party whether the
direct plan should supersede the delegate plan. Only in certain
cities, however, was the primary made mandatory in these States.
By far the larger areas retained the convention.

There is noticeable in these years a gradual increase in the
amount of legislation concerning the nominating machinery--
prescribing the days and hours for holding elections of
delegates, the size of the polling-place, the nature of the
ballotbox, the poll-list, who might participate in the choice of
delegates, how the returns were to be made, and so on. By the
time, then, that the Australian ballot came, with its profound
changes, nearly all the States had attempted to remove the
glaring abuses of the nominating system; and several of them
officially recognized the direct primary. The State was reluctant
to abolish the convention system entirely; and the Crawford
County plan long remained merely optional. But in 1901 Minnesota
enacted a state-wide, mandatory primary law. Mississippi followed
in 1902, Wisconsin in 1903, and Oregon in 1904. This movement has
swept the country.

Few States retain the nominating convention, and where it remains
it is shackled by legal restrictions. The boss, however, has
devised adequate means for controlling primaries, and a return to
a modified convention system is being earnestly discussed in many
States to circumvent the further ingenuity of the boss. A further
step towards the state control of parties was taken when laws
began to busy themselves with the conduct of the campaign.
Corrupt Practices Acts began to assume bulk in the early
nineties, to limit the expenditure of candidates, and to
enumerate the objects for which campaign committees might
legitimately spend money. These are usually personal traveling
expenses of the candidates, rental of rooms for committees and
halls for meetings, payment of musicians and speakers and their
traveling expenses, printing campaign material, postage for
distribution of letters, newspapers and printed matter, telephone
and telegraph charges, political advertising, employing
challengers at the polls, necessary clerk hire, and conveyances
for bringing aged or infirm voters to the polls. The maximum
amount that can be spent by candidates is fixed, and they are
required to make under oath a detailed statement of their
expenses in both primary and general elections. The various
committees, also, must make detailed reports of the funds they
handle, the amount, the contributors, and the expenditures.
Corporations are forbidden to contribute, and the amount that
candidates themselves may give is limited in many States. These
exactions are reinforced by stringent laws against bribery.
Persons found guilty of either receiving or soliciting a bribe
are generally disfranchised or declared ineligible for public
office for a term of years. Illinois, for the second offense,
forever disfranchises.

It is not surprising that these restrictions have led the State
to face the question whether it should not itself bear some of
the expenses of the campaign. It has, of course, already assumed
an enormous burden formerly borne entirely by the party. The cost
of primary and general elections nowadays is tremendous. A few
Western States print a campaign pamphlet and distribute it to
every voter. The pamphlet contains usually the photographs of the
candidates, a brief biography, and a statement of principles.

These are the principal encroachments made by the Government upon
the autonomy of the party. The details are endless. The election
laws of New York fill 330 printed pages. It is little wonder that
American parties are beginning to study the organization of
European parties, such as the labor parties and the social
democratic parties, which have enlisted a rather fervent party
fealty. These are propagandist parties and require to be active
all the year round. So they demand annual dues of their members
and have permanent salaried officials and official party organs.
Such a permanent organization was suggested for the National
Progressive party. But the early disintegration of the party made
impossible what would have been an interesting experiment. After
the election of 1916, Governor Whitman of New York suggested that
the Republican party choose a manager and pay him $10,000 a year
and have a lien on all his time and energy. The plan was widely
discussed and its severest critics were the politicians who would
suffer from it. The wide-spread comment with which it was
received revealed the change that has come over the popular idea
of a political party since the State began forty years ago to
bring the party under its control.

But flexibility is absolutely essential to a party system that
adequately serves a growing democracy. And under a two-party
system, as ours is probably bound to remain, the independent
voter usually holds the balance of power. He may be merely a
disgruntled voter seeking for revenge, or an overpleased voter
seeking to maintain a profitable status quo, or he may belong to
that class of super-citizens from which mugwumps arise. In any
case, the majorities at elections are usually determined by him.
And party orthodoxy made by the State is almost as distasteful to
him as the rigor of the boss. He relishes neither the one nor the
other.

In the larger cities the citizens' tickets and fusion movements
are types of independent activities. In some cities they are
merely temporary associations, formed for a single, thorough
housecleaning. The Philadelphia Committee of One Hundred, which
was organized in 1880 to fight the Gas Ring, is an example. It
issued a Declaration of Principles, demanding the promotion of
public service rather than private greed, and the prosecution of
"those who have been guilty of election frauds, maladministration
of office, or misappropriation of public funds." Announcing that
it would endorse only candidates who signed this declaration, the
committee supported the Democratic candidates, and nominated for
Receiver of Taxes a candidate of its own, who became also the
Democratic nominee when the regular Democratic candidate
withdrew. Philadelphia was overwhelmingly Republican. But the
committee's aid was powerful enough to elect the Democratic
candidate for mayor by 6000 majority and the independent
candidate for Receiver of Taxes by 20,000. This gave the
Committee access to the records of the doings of the Gas Ring. In
1884, however, the candidate which it endorsed was defeated, and
it disbanded.

Similar in experience was the famous New York Committee of
Seventy, organized in 1894 after Dr. Parkhurst's lurid
disclosures of police connivance with every degrading vice. A
call was issued by thirty-three well-known citizens for a
non-partizan mass meeting, and at this meeting a committee of
seventy was appointed "with full power to confer with other
anti-Tammany organizations, and to take such actions as may be
necessary to further the objects of this meeting as set forth in
the call therefor, and the address adopted by this meeting." The
committee adopted a platform, appointed an executive and a
finance committee, and nominated a full ticket, distributing the
candidates among both parties. All other anti-Tammany
organizations endorsed this ticket, and it was elected by large
majorities. The committee dissolved after having secured certain
charter amendments for the city and seeing its roster of officers
inaugurated.

The Municipal Voters' League of Chicago is an important example
of the permanent type of citizens' organization. The league is
composed of voters in every ward, who, acting through committees
and alert officers, scrutinize every candidate for city office
from the Mayor down. It does not aim to nominate a ticket of its
own, but to exercise such vigilance, enforced by so effective an
organization and such wide-reaching publicity, that the various
parties will, of their own volition, nominate men whom the league
can endorse. By thus putting on the hydraulic pressure of
organized public opinion, it has had a considerable influence on
the parties and a very stimulating effect on the citizenry.

Finally, there has developed in recent years the fusion movement,
whereby the opponents of boss rule in all parties unite and back
an independent or municipal ticket. The election of Mayor Mitchel
of New York in 1913 was thus accomplished. In Milwaukee, a fusion
has been successful against the Socialists. And in many lesser
cities this has brought at least temporary relief from the
oppression of the local oligarchy.



CHAPTER XI. THE EXPERT AT LAST

The administrative weakness of a democracy, namely, the tendency
towards a government by job-hunters, was disclosed even in the
early days of the United States, when the official machinery was
simple and the number of offices few. Washington at once foresaw
both the difficulties and the duties that the appointing power
imposed. Soon after his inauguration he wrote to Rutledge: "I
anticipate that one of the most difficult and delicate parts of
the duty of any office will be that which relates to nominations
for appointments." And he was most scrupulous and painstaking in
his appointments. Fitness for duty was paramount with him, though
he recognized geographical necessity and distributed the offices
with that precision which characterized all his acts.

John Adams made very few appointments. After his term had
expired, he wrote: "Washington appointed a multitude of Democrats
and Jacobins of the deepest die. I have been more cautious in
this respect."

The test of partizan loyalty, however, was not applied generally
until after the election of Jefferson. The ludicrous
apprehensions of the Federalists as to what would follow upon his
election were not allayed by his declared intentions. "I have
given," he wrote to Monroe, "and will give only to Republicans
under existing circumstances." Jefferson was too good a
politician to overlook his opportunity to annihilate the
Federalists. He hoped to absorb them in his own party, "to unite
the names of Federalists and Republicans." Moderate Federalists,
who possessed sufficient gifts of grace for conversion, he
sedulously nursed. But he removed all officers for whose removal
any special reason could be discovered. The "midnight
appointments" of John Adams he refused to acknowledge, and he
paid no heed to John Marshall's dicta in Marbury versus Madison.
He was zealous in discovering plausible excuses for making
vacancies. The New York Evening Post described him as "gazing
round, with wild anxiety furiously inquiring, 'how are vacancies
to be obtained?'" Directly and indirectly, Jefferson effected,
during his first term, 164 changes in the offices at his
disposal, a large number for those days. This he did so craftily,
with such delicate regard for geographical sensitiveness and with
such a nice balance between fitness for office and the desire for
office, that by the end of his second term he had not only
consolidated our first disciplined and eager political party, but
had quieted the storm against his policy of partizan
proscription.

During the long regime of the Jeffersonian Republicans there were
three significant movements. In January, 1811, Nathaniel Macon
introduced his amendment to the Constitution providing that no
member of Congress should receive a civil appointment "under the
authority of the United States until the expiration of the
presidential term in which such person shall have served as
senator or representative." An amendment was offered by Josiah
Quincy, making ineligible to appointment the relations by blood
or marriage of any senator or representative. Nepotism was
considered the curse of the civil service, and for twenty years
similar amendments were discussed at almost every session of
Congress. John Quincy Adams said that half of the members wanted
office, and the other half wanted office for their relatives.

In 1820 the Four Years' Act substituted a four-year tenure of
office, in place of a term at the pleasure of the President, for
most of the federal appointments. The principal argument urged in
favor of the law was that unsatisfactory civil servants could
easily be dropped without reflection on their character.
Defalcations had been discovered to the amount of nearly a
million dollars, due mainly to carelessness and gross
inefficiency. It was further argued that any efficient incumbent
need not be disquieted, for he would be reappointed. The law,
however, fulfilled Jefferson's prophecy: it kept "in constant
excitement all the hungry cormorants for office."

What Jefferson began, Jackson consummated. The stage was now set
for Democracy. Public office had been marshaled as a force in
party maneuver. In his first annual message, Jackson announced
his philosophy:

"There are perhaps few men who can for any great length of time
enjoy office and power without being more or less under the
influence of feelings unfavorable to the faithful discharge of
their public duties .... Office is considered as a species of
property, and government rather as a means of promoting
individual interests than as an instrument created solely for the
service of the people. Corruption in some, and in others a
perversion of correct feelings and principles, divert government
from its legitimate ends and make it an engine for the support of
the few at the expense of the many. The duties of all public
offices are, or at least admit of being made, so plain, so simple
that men of intelligence may readily qualify themselves for their
performance . . . . In a country where offices are created solely
for the benefit of the people, no one man has any more intrinsic
right to official station than another."

The Senate refused Jackson's request for an extension of the Four
Years' law to cover all positions in the civil service. It also
refused to confirm some of his appointments, notably that of Van
Buren as minister to Great Britain. The debate upon this
appointment gave the spoilsman an epigram. Clay with directness
pointed to Van Buren as the introducer "of the odious system of
proscription for the exercise of the elective franchise in the
government of the United States." He continued: "I understand it
is the system on which the party in his own State, of which he is
the reputed head, constantly acts. He was among the first of the
secretaries to apply that system to the dismission of clerks of
his department . . . known to me to be highly meritorious . . .
It is a detestable system."

And Webster thundered: "I pronounce my rebuke as solemnly and as
decisively as I can upon this first instance in which an American
minister has been sent abroad as the representative of his party
and not as the representative of his country."

To these and other challenges, Senator Marcy of New York made his
well-remembered retort that "the politicians of the United States
are not so fastidious . . . . They see nothing wrong in the rule
that to the victor belong the spoils of the enemy."

Jackson, with all his bluster and the noise of his followers,
made his proscriptions relatively fewer than those of Jefferson.
He removed only 252 of about 612 presidential appointees.* It
should, however, be remembered that those who were not removed
had assured Jackson's agents of their loyalty to the new
Democracy.

* This does not include deputy postmasters, who numbered about
8000 and were not placed in the presidential list until 1836.


If Jackson did not inaugurate the spoils system, he at least gave
it a mission. It was to save the country from the curse of
officialdom. His successor, Van Buren, brought the system to a
perfection that only the experienced politician could achieve.
Van Buren required of all appointees partizan service; and his
own nomination, at Baltimore, was made a foregone conclusion by
the host of federal job-holders who were delegates. Van Buren
simply introduced at Washington the methods of the Albany
Regency.

The Whigs blustered bravely against this proscription. But their
own President, General Harrison, "Old Tippecanoe," was helpless
against the saturnalia of office-seekers that engulfed him.
Harrison, when he came to power, removed about one-half of the
officials in the service. And, although the partizan color of the
President changed with Harrison's death, after a few weeks in
office,--Tyler was merely a Whig of convenience--there was no
change in the President's attitude towards the spoils system.

Presidential inaugurations became orgies of office-seekers, and
the first weeks of every new term were given over to distributing
the jobs, ordinary business having to wait. President Polk, who
removed the usual quota, is complimented by Webster for making
"rather good selections from his own friends." The practice, now
firmly established, was continued by Taylor, Pierce, and
Buchanan.

Lincoln found himself surrounded by circumstances that made
caution necessary in every appointment. His party was new and
composed of many diverse elements. He had to transform their
jealousies into enthusiasm, for the approach of civil war
demanded supreme loyalty and unity of action. To this greater
cause of saving the Union he bent every effort and used every
instrumentality at his command. No one before him had made so
complete a change in the official personnel of the capital as the
change which he was constrained to make. No one before him or
since used the appointing power with such consummate skill or
displayed such rare tact and knowledge of human nature in seeking
the advice of those who deemed their advice valuable. The war
greatly increased the number of appointments, and it also imposed
obligations that made merit sometimes a secondary consideration.
With the statesman's vision, Lincoln recognized both the use and
the abuse of the patronage system. He declined to gratify the
office-seekers who thronged the capital at the beginning of his
second term; and they returned home disappointed. The twenty
years following the Civil War were years of agitation for reform.
People were at last recognizing the folly of using the
multiplying public offices for party spoils. The quarrel between
Congress and President Johnson over removals, and the Tenure of
Office Act, focused popular attention on the constitutional
question of appointment and removal, and the recklessness of the
political manager during Grant's two terms disgusted the
thoughtful citizen.

The first attempts to apply efficiency to the civil service had
been made when pass examinations were used for sifting candidates
for clerkships in the Treasury Department in 1853, when such
tests were prescribed by law for the lowest grade of clerkships.
The head of the department was given complete control over the
examinations, and they were not exacting. In 1864 Senator Sumner
introduced a bill "to provide for the greater efficiency of the
civil service." It was considered chimerical and dropped.

Meanwhile, a steadfast and able champion of reform appeared in
the House, Thomas A. Jenckes, a prominent lawyer of Rhode Island.
A bill which he introduced in December, 1865, received no
hearing. But in the following year a select joint committee was
charged to examine the whole question of appointments,
dismissals, and patronage. Mr. Jenckes presented an elaborate
report in May, 1868, explaining the civil service of other
countries. This report, which is the corner stone of American
civil service reform, provided the material for congressional
debate and threw the whole subject into the public arena. Jenckes
in the House and Carl Schurz in the Senate saw to it that ardent
and convincing defense of reform was not wanting. In compliance
with President Grant's request for a law to "govern not the
tenure, but the manner of making all appointments," a rider was
attached to the appropriation bill in 1870, asking the President
"to prescribe such rules and regulations" as he saw fit, and "to
employ suitable persons to conduct" inquiries into the best
method for admitting persons into the civil service. A commission
of which George William Curtis was chairman made recommendations,
but they were not adopted and Curtis resigned. The New York Civil
Service Reform Association was organized in 1877; and the
National League, organized in 1881, soon had flourishing branches
in most of the large cities. The battle was largely between the
President and Congress. Each succeeding President signified his
adherence to reform, but neutralized his words by sanctioning
vast changes in the service. Finally, under circumstances already
described, on January 16, 1883, the Civil Service Act was passed.

This law had a stimulating effect upon state and municipal civil
service. New York passed a law the same year, patterned after the
federal act. Massachusetts followed in 1884, and within a few
years many of the States had adopted some sort of civil service
reform, and the large cities were experimenting with the merit
system. It was not, however, until the rapid expansion of the
functions of government and the consequent transformation in the
nature of public duties that civil service reform made notable
headway. When the Government assumed the duties of health
officer, forester, statistician, and numerous other highly
specialized functions, the presence of the scientific expert
became imperative; and vast undertakings, like the building of
the Panama Canal and the enormous irrigation projects of the
West, could not be entrusted to the spoilsman and his minions.

The war has accustomed us to the commandeering of utilities, of
science, and of skill upon a colossal scale. From this height of
public devotion it is improbable that we shall decline, after the
national peril has passed, into the depths of administrative
incompetency which our Republic, and all its parts, occupied for
so many years. The need for an efficient and highly complex State
has been driven home to the consciousness of the average citizen.
And this foretokens the permanent enlistment of talent in the
public service to the end that democracy may provide that
effective nationalism imposed by the new era of world
competition.



BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

There is no collected material of the literature of exposure. It
is found in the official reports of investigating committees;
such as the Lexow, Mazet, and Fassett committees in New York, and
the report on campaign contributions by the Senate Committee on
Privileges and Elections (1913). The muckraker has scattered such
indiscriminate charges that great caution is necessary to
discover the truth. Only testimony taken under oath can be relied
upon. And for local exposes the official court records must be
sought.

The annual proceedings of the National Municipal League contain a
great deal of useful material on municipal politics. The reports
of local organizations, such as the New York Bureau of Municipal
Research and the Pittsburgh Voters' League, are invaluable, as
are the reports of occasional bodies, like the Philadelphia
Committee of Fifty.

Personal touches can be gleaned from the autobiographies of such
public men as Platt, Foraker, Weed, La Follette, and in such
biographies as Croly's "M. A. Hanna."

On Municipal Conditions:

W. B. Munro, "The Government of American Cities" (1913). An
authoritative and concise account of the development of American
city government. Chapter VII deals with municipal politics.

J. J. Hamilton, "Dethronement of the City Boss" (1910). A
description of the operation of commission government.

E. S. Bradford, "Commission Government in American Cities"
(1911). A careful study of the commission plan.

H. Bruere, "New City Government" (1912). An interesting account
of the new municipal regime.

Lincoln Steffens, "The Shame of the Cities" and "The Struggle for
Self-Government" (1906). The Prince of the Muckrakers'
contribution to the literature of awakening.

On State Conditions:

There is an oppressive barrenness of material on this subject.

P. S. Reinsch, "American Legislatures and Legislative Methods"
(1907). A brilliant exposition of the legislatures' activities.

E. L. Godkin, "Unforeseen Tendencies in Democracy" contains a
thoughtful essay on "The Decline of Legislatures."

On Political Parties and Machines:

M. Ostrogorski, "Democracy and the Organization of Political
Parties," 2 vols. (1902). The second volume contains a
comprehensive and able survey of the American party system. It
has been abridged into a single volume edition called "Democracy
and the Party System in the United States" (1910).

James Bryce, "The American Commonwealth," 2 vols. Volume II
contains a noteworthy account of our political system.

Jesse Macy, "Party Organization and Machinery" (1912). A succinct
account of party machinery.

J. A. Woodburn, "Political Parties and Party Problems" (1906). A
sane account of our political task.

P. O. Ray, "An Introduction to Political Parties and Practical
Politics" (1913). Valuable for its copious references to current
literature on political subjects.

Theodore Roosevelt, "Essays on Practical Politics" (1888).
Vigorous description of machine methods.

G. M. Gregory, "The Corrupt Use of Money in Politics and Laws for
its Prevention" (1893). Written before the later exposes, it
nevertheless gives a clear view of the problem.

W. M. Ivins, "Machine Politics" (1897). In New York City--by a
keen observer.

George Vickers, "The Fall of Bossism" (1883). On the overthrow of
the Philadelphia Gas Ring.

Gustavus Myers, "History of Tammany Hall" (1901; revised 1917).
The best book on the subject.

E. C. Griffith, "The Rise and Development of the Gerrymander"
(1907).

Historical:

H. J. Ford, "Rise and Growth of American Politics" (1898). One of
the earliest and one of the best accounts of the development of
American politics.

Alexander Johnston and J. A. Woodburn, "American Political
History," 2 vols. (1905). A brilliant recital of American party
history. The most satisfactory book on the subject.

W. M. Sloane, "Party Government in the United States" (1914). A
concise and convenient recital. Brings our party history to date.

J. B. McMaster, "With the Fathers" (1896). A volume of delightful
historical essays, including one on "The Political Depravity of
the Fathers."

On Nominations:

F. W. Dallinger, "Nominations for Elective Office in the United
States" (1897). The most thorough work on the subject, describing
the development of our nominating systems.

C. E. Merriam, "Primary Elections" (1908). A concise description
of the primary and its history.

R. S. Childs, "Short Ballot Principles" (1911). A splendid
account by the father of the short ballot movement.

C. E. Meyer, "Nominating Systems" (1902). Good on the caucus.

On the Presidency:

J. B. Bishop, "Our Political Drama" (1904). A readable account of
national conventions and presidential campaigns.

A. K. McClure, "Our Presidents and How We Make Them" (1903).

Edward Stanwood, "A History of the Presidency" (1898). Gives
party platforms and describes each presidential campaign.

On Congress:

G. H. Haynes, "The Election of United States Senators" (1906).

H. J. Ford, "The Cost of Our National Government" (1910). A fine
account of congressional bad housekeeping.

MARY C. Follett, "The Speaker of the House of Representatives"
(1896).

Woodrow Wilson, "Congressional Government" (1885). Most
interesting reading in the light of the Wilson Administration.

L. G. McConachie, "Congressional Committees" (1898).

On Special Topics:

C. R. Fish, "Civil Service and the Patronage" (1905). The best
work on the subject.

J. D. Barnett, "The Operation of the Initiative, Referendum, and
Recall in Oregon" (1915). A helpful, intensive study of these
important questions.

E. P. Oberholtzer, The Referendum in America (1912). The most
satisfactory and comprehensive work on the subject. Also
discusses the initiative.

J. R. Commons, "Proportional Representation" (1907). The standard
American book on the subject.

R. C. Brooks, "Corruption in American Politics and Life" (1910).
A survey of our political pathology.






Prepared by David Reed haradda@aol.com or davidr@inconnect.com



A Boy's Will  
By Robert Frost 

CONTENTS
    Part I 
        Into My Own 
            The youth is persuaded that he will be rather more than less himself 
            for having forsworn the world.
        Ghost House 
            He is happy in society of his choosing.
        My November Guest 
            He is in love with being misunderstood.
        Love and a Question 
            He is in doubt whether to admit real trouble to a place beside the 
            hearth with love.
        A Late Walk 
            He courts the autumnal mood.
        Stars 
            There is no oversight of human affairs.
        Storm Fear 
            He is afraid of his own isolation.
        Wind and Window Flower 
            Out of the winter things he fashions a story of modern love.
        To the Thawing Wind (audio) 
            He calls on change through the violence of the elements.
        A Prayer in Spring 
            He discovers that the greatness of love lies not in forward-looking 
            thoughts;
        Flower-gathering 
            nor yet in any spur it may be to ambition.
        Rose Pogonias 
            He is no dissenter from the ritualism of nature;
        Asking for Roses 
            nor from the ritualism of youth which is make-believe.
        Waiting--Afield at Dusk 
            He arrives at the turn of the year.
        In a Vale 
            Out of old longings he fashions a story.
        A Dream Pang 
            He is shown by a dream how really well it is with him.
        In Neglect 
            He is scornful of folk his scorn cannot reach.
        The Vantage Point 
            And again scornful, but there is no one hurt.
        Mowing 
            He takes up life simply with the small tasks.
        Going for Water 
    Part II 
        Revelation 
            He resolves to become intelligible, at least to himself, since there 
            is no help else;
        The Trial by Existence 
            and to know definitely what he thinks about the soul;
        In Equal Sacrifice 
            about love;
        The Tuft of Flowers 
            about fellowship;
        Spoils of the Dead 
            about death;
        Pan with Us 
            about art (his own);
        The Demiurge's Laugh 
            about science.
    Part III 
        Now Close the Windows 
            It is time to make an end of speaking.
        A Line-storm Song 
            It is the autumnal mood with a difference.
        October 
            He sees days slipping from him that were the best for what they 
            were.
        My Butterfly 
            There are things that can never be the same.
        Reluctance 

Into My Own

    ONE of my wishes is that those dark trees, 
    So old and firm they scarcely show the breeze, 
    Were not, as 'twere, the merest mask of gloom, 
    But stretched away unto the edge of doom. 
    I should not be withheld but that some day 
    Into their vastness I should steal away, 
    Fearless of ever finding open land, 
    Or highway where the slow wheel pours the sand. 
    I do not see why I should e'er turn back, 
    Or those should not set forth upon my track 
    To overtake me, who should miss me here 
    And long to know if still I held them dear. 
    They would not find me changed from him they knew-- 
    Only more sure of all I thought was true. 

Ghost House

    I DWELL in a lonely house I know 
    That vanished many a summer ago, 
    And left no trace but the cellar walls, 
    And a cellar in which the daylight falls, 
    And the purple-stemmed wild raspberries grow. 
    O'er ruined fences the grape-vines shield 
    The woods come back to the mowing field; 
    The orchard tree has grown one copse 
    Of new wood and old where the woodpecker chops; 
    The footpath down to the well is healed. 
    I dwell with a strangely aching heart 
    In that vanished abode there far apart 
    On that disused and forgotten road 
    That has no dust-bath now for the toad. 
    Night comes; the black bats tumble and dart; 
    The whippoorwill is coming to shout 
    And hush and cluck and flutter about: 
    I hear him begin far enough away 
    Full many a time to say his say 
    Before he arrives to say it out. 
    It is under the small, dim, summer star. 
    I know not who these mute folk are 
    Who share the unlit place with me-- 
    Those stones out under the low-limbed tree 
    Doubtless bear names that the mosses mar. 
    They are tireless folk, but slow and sad, 
    Though two, close-keeping, are lass and lad,-- 
    With none among them that ever sings, 
    And yet, in view of how many things, 
    As sweet companions as might be had. 

My November Guest

    MY Sorrow, when she's here with me, 
    Thinks these dark days of autumn rain 
    Are beautiful as days can be; 
    She loves the bare, the withered tree; 
    She walks the sodden pasture lane. 
    Her pleasure will not let me stay. 
    She talks and I am fain to list: 
    She's glad the birds are gone away, 
    She's glad her simple worsted gray 
    Is silver now with clinging mist. 
    The desolate, deserted trees, 
    The faded earth, the heavy sky, 
    The beauties she so truly sees, 
    She thinks I have no eye for these, 
    And vexes me for reason why. 
    Not yesterday I learned to know 
    The love of bare November days 
    Before the coming of the snow, 
    But it were vain to tell her so, 
    And they are better for her praise. 

Love and a Question

    A STRANGER came to the door at eve, 
    And he spoke the bridegroom fair. 
    He bore a green-white stick in his hand, 
    And, for all burden, care. 
    He asked with the eyes more than the lips 
    For a shelter for the night, 
    And he turned and looked at the road afar 
    Without a window light. 
    The bridegroom came forth into the porch 
    With, 'Let us look at the sky, 
    And question what of the night to be, 
    Stranger, you and I.' 
    The woodbine leaves littered the yard, 
    The woodbine berries were blue, 
    Autumn, yes, winter was in the wind; 
    'Stranger, I wish I knew.' 
    Within, the bride in the dusk alone 
    Bent over the open fire, 
    Her face rose-red with the glowing coal 
    And the thought of the heart's desire. 
    The bridegroom looked at the weary road, 
    Yet saw but her within, 
    And wished her heart in a case of gold 
    And pinned with a silver pin. 
    The bridegroom thought it little to give 
    A dole of bread, a purse, 
    A heartfelt prayer for the poor of God, 
    Or for the rich a curse; 
    But whether or not a man was asked 
    To mar the love of two 
    By harboring woe in the bridal house, 
    The bridegroom wished he knew. 

A Late Walk

    WHEN I go up through the mowing field, 
    The headless aftermath, 
    Smooth-laid like thatch with the heavy dew, 
    Half closes the garden path. 
    And when I come to the garden ground, 
    The whir of sober birds 
    Up from the tangle of withered weeds 
    Is sadder than any words. 
    A tree beside the wall stands bare, 
    But a leaf that lingered brown, 
    Disturbed, I doubt not, by my thought, 
    Comes softly rattling down. 
    I end not far from my going forth 
    By picking the faded blue 
    Of the last remaining aster flower 
    To carry again to you. 

Stars

    HOW countlessly they congregate 
    O'er our tumultuous snow, 
    Which flows in shapes as tall as trees 
    When wintry winds do blow!-- 
    As if with keenness for our fate, 
    Our faltering few steps on 
    To white rest, and a place of rest 
    Invisible at dawn,-- 
    And yet with neither love nor hate, 
    Those stars like some snow-white 
    Minerva's snow-white marble eyes 
    Without the gift of sight. 

Storm Fear

    WHEN the wind works against us in the dark, 
    And pelts with snow 
    The lowest chamber window on the east, 
    And whispers with a sort of stifled bark, 
    The beast, 
    'Come out! Come out!'-- 
    It costs no inward struggle not to go, 
    Ah, no! 
    I count our strength, 
    Two and a child, 
    Those of us not asleep subdued to mark 
    How the cold creeps as the fire dies at length,-- 
    How drifts are piled, 
    Dooryard and road ungraded, 
    Till even the comforting barn grows far away 
    And my heart owns a doubt 
    Whether 'tis in us to arise with day 
    And save ourselves unaided. 

Wind and Window Flower

    LOVERS, forget your love, 
    And list to the love of these, 
    She a window flower, 
    And he a winter breeze. 
    When the frosty window veil 
    Was melted down at noon, 
    And the cagèd yellow bird 
    Hung over her in tune, 
    He marked her through the pane, 
    He could not help but mark, 
    And only passed her by, 
    To come again at dark. 
    He was a winter wind, 
    Concerned with ice and snow, 
    Dead weeds and unmated birds, 
    And little of love could know. 
    But he sighed upon the sill, 
    He gave the sash a shake, 
    As witness all within 
    Who lay that night awake. 
    Perchance he half prevailed 
    To win her for the flight 
    From the firelit looking-glass 
    And warm stove-window light. 
    But the flower leaned aside 
    And thought of naught to say, 
    And morning found the breeze 
    A hundred miles away. 


To the Thawing Wind (audio)

    COME with rain, O loud Southwester! 
    Bring the singer, bring the nester; 
    Give the buried flower a dream; 
    Make the settled snow-bank steam; 
    Find the brown beneath the white; 
    But whate'er you do to-night, 
    Bathe my window, make it flow, 
    Melt it as the ices go; 
    Melt the glass and leave the sticks 
    Like a hermit's crucifix; 
    Burst into my narrow stall; 
    Swing the picture on the wall; 
    Run the rattling pages o'er; 
    Scatter poems on the floor; 
    Turn the poet out of door. 

A Prayer in Spring

    OH, give us pleasure in the flowers to-day; 
    And give us not to think so far away 
    As the uncertain harvest; keep us here 
    All simply in the springing of the year. 
    Oh, give us pleasure in the orchard white, 
    Like nothing else by day, like ghosts by night; 
    And make us happy in the happy bees, 
    The swarm dilating round the perfect trees. 
    And make us happy in the darting bird 
    That suddenly above the bees is heard, 
    The meteor that thrusts in with needle bill, 
    And off a blossom in mid air stands still. 
    For this is love and nothing else is love, 
    The which it is reserved for God above 
    To sanctify to what far ends He will, 
    But which it only needs that we fulfil. 

Flower-gathering

    I LEFT you in the morning, 
    And in the morning glow, 
    You walked a way beside me 
    To make me sad to go. 
    Do you know me in the gloaming, 
    Gaunt and dusty grey with roaming? 
    Are you dumb because you know me not, 
    Or dumb because you know? 
    All for me? And not a question 
    For the faded flowers gay 
    That could take me from beside you 
    For the ages of a day? 
    They are yours, and be the measure 
    Of their worth for you to treasure, 
    The measure of the little while 
    That I've been long away. 

Rose Pogonias

    A SATURATED meadow, 
    Sun-shaped and jewel-small, 
    A circle scarcely wider 
    Than the trees around were tall; 
    Where winds were quite excluded, 
    And the air was stifling sweet 
    With the breath of many flowers,-- 
    A temple of the heat. 
    There we bowed us in the burning, 
    As the sun's right worship is, 
    To pick where none could miss them 
    A thousand orchises; 
    For though the grass was scattered, 
    Yet every second spear 
    Seemed tipped with wings of color, 
    That tinged the atmosphere. 
    We raised a simple prayer 
    Before we left the spot, 
    That in the general mowing 
    That place might be forgot; 
    Or if not all so favoured, 
    Obtain such grace of hours, 
    That none should mow the grass there 
    While so confused with flowers. 

Asking for Roses

    A HOUSE that lacks, seemingly, mistress and master, 
    With doors that none but the wind ever closes, 
    Its floor all littered with glass and with plaster; 
    It stands in a garden of old-fashioned roses. 
    I pass by that way in the gloaming with Mary; 
    'I wonder,' I say, 'who the owner of those is. 
    'Oh, no one you know,' she answers me airy, 
    'But one we must ask if we want any roses.' 
    So we must join hands in the dew coming coldly 
    There in the hush of the wood that reposes, 
    And turn and go up to the open door boldly, 
    And knock to the echoes as beggars for roses. 
    'Pray, are you within there, Mistress Who-were-you?' 
    'Tis Mary that speaks and our errand discloses. 
    'Pray, are you within there? Bestir you, bestir you! 
    'Tis summer again; there's two come for roses. 
    'A word with you, that of the singer recalling-- 
    Old Herrick: a saying that every maid knows is 
    A flower unplucked is but left to the falling, 
    And nothing is gained by not gathering roses.' 
    We do not loosen our hands' intertwining 
    (Not caring so very much what she supposes), 
    There when she comes on us mistily shining 
    And grants us by silence the boon of her roses. 

Waiting 
Afield at Dusk

    WHAT things for dream there are when spectre-like, 
    Moving among tall haycocks lightly piled, 
    I enter alone upon the stubble field, 
    From which the laborers' voices late have died, 
    And in the antiphony of afterglow 
    And rising full moon, sit me down 
    Upon the full moon's side of the first haycock 
    And lose myself amid so many alike. 
    I dream upon the opposing lights of the hour, 
    Preventing shadow until the moon prevail; 
    I dream upon the night-hawks peopling heaven, 
    Each circling each with vague unearthly cry, 
    Or plunging headlong with fierce twang afar; 
    And on the bat's mute antics, who would seem 
    Dimly to have made out my secret place, 
    Only to lose it when he pirouettes, 
    And seek it endlessly with purblind haste; 
    On the last swallow's sweep; and on the rasp 
    In the abyss of odor and rustle at my back, 
    That, silenced by my advent, finds once more, 
    After an interval, his instrument, 
    And tries once--twice--and thrice if I be there; 
    And on the worn book of old-golden song 
    I brought not here to read, it seems, but hold 
    And freshen in this air of withering sweetness; 
    But on the memory of one absent most, 
    For whom these lines when they shall greet her eye. 

In a Vale

    WHEN I was young, we dwelt in a vale 
    By a misty fen that rang all night, 
    And thus it was the maidens pale 
    I knew so well, whose garments trail 
    Across the reeds to a window light. 
    The fen had every kind of bloom, 
    And for every kind there was a face, 
    And a voice that has sounded in my room 
    Across the sill from the outer gloom. 
    Each came singly unto her place, 
    But all came every night with the mist; 
    And often they brought so much to say 
    Of things of moment to which, they wist, 
    One so lonely was fain to list, 
    That the stars were almost faded away 
    Before the last went, heavy with dew, 
    Back to the place from which she came-- 
    Where the bird was before it flew, 
    Where the flower was before it grew, 
    Where bird and flower were one and the same. 
    And thus it is I know so well 
    Why the flower has odor, the bird has song. 
    You have only to ask me, and I can tell. 
    No, not vainly there did I dwell, 
    Nor vainly listen all the night long. 

A Dream Pang

    I HAD withdrawn in forest, and my song 
    Was swallowed up in leaves that blew alway; 
    And to the forest edge you came one day 
    (This was my dream) and looked and pondered long, 
    But did not enter, though the wish was strong: 
    You shook your pensive head as who should say, 
    'I dare not--too far in his footsteps stray-- 
    He must seek me would he undo the wrong. 
    Not far, but near, I stood and saw it all 
    Behind low boughs the trees let down outside; 
    And the sweet pang it cost me not to call 
    And tell you that I saw does still abide. 
    But 'tis not true that thus I dwelt aloof, 
    For the wood wakes, and you are here for proof. 

In Neglect

    THEY leave us so to the way we took, 
    As two in whom they were proved mistaken, 
    That we sit sometimes in the wayside nook, 
    With mischievous, vagrant, seraphic look, 
    And try if we cannot feel forsaken. 

The Vantage Point

    IF tired of trees I seek again mankind, 
    Well I know where to hie me--in the dawn, 
    To a slope where the cattle keep the lawn. 
    There amid lolling juniper reclined, 
    Myself unseen, I see in white defined 
    Far off the homes of men, and farther still, 
    The graves of men on an opposing hill, 
    Living or dead, whichever are to mind. 
    And if by moon I have too much of these, 
    I have but to turn on my arm, and lo, 
    The sun-burned hillside sets my face aglow, 
    My breathing shakes the bluet like a breeze, 
    I smell the earth, I smell the bruisèd plant, 
    I look into the crater of the ant. 

Mowing

    THERE was never a sound beside the wood but one, 
    And that was my long scythe whispering to the ground. 
    What was it it whispered? I knew not well myself; 
    Perhaps it was something about the heat of the sun, 
    Something, perhaps, about the lack of sound-- 
    And that was why it whispered and did not speak. 
    It was no dream of the gift of idle hours, 
    Or easy gold at the hand of fay or elf: 
    Anything more than the truth would have seemed too weak 
    To the earnest love that laid the swale in rows, 
    Not without feeble-pointed spikes of flowers 
    (Pale orchises), and scared a bright green snake. 
    The fact is the sweetest dream that labor knows. 
    My long scythe whispered and left the hay to make. 

Going for Water

    THE well was dry beside the door, 
    And so we went with pail and can 
    Across the fields behind the house 
    To seek the brook if still it ran; 
    Not loth to have excuse to go, 
    Because the autumn eve was fair 
    (Though chill), because the fields were ours, 
    And by the brook our woods were there. 
    We ran as if to meet the moon 
    That slowly dawned behind the trees, 
    The barren boughs without the leaves, 
    Without the birds, without the breeze. 
    But once within the wood, we paused 
    Like gnomes that hid us from the moon, 
    Ready to run to hiding new 
    With laughter when she found us soon. 
    Each laid on other a staying hand 
    To listen ere we dared to look, 
    And in the hush we joined to make 
    We heard, we knew we heard the brook. 
    A note as from a single place, 
    A slender tinkling fall that made 
    Now drops that floated on the pool 
    Like pearls, and now a silver blade.

Revelation

    WE make ourselves a place apart 
    Behind light words that tease and flout, 
    But oh, the agitated heart 
    Till someone find us really out. 
    'Tis pity if the case require 
    (Or so we say) that in the end 
    We speak the literal to inspire 
    The understanding of a friend. 
    But so with all, from babes that play 
    At hide-and-seek to God afar, 
    So all who hide too well away 
    Must speak and tell us where they are. 

The Trial by Existence

    EVEN the bravest that are slain 
    Shall not dissemble their surprise 
    On waking to find valor reign, 
    Even as on earth, in paradise; 
    And where they sought without the sword 
    Wide fields of asphodel fore'er, 
    To find that the utmost reward 
    Of daring should be still to dare. 
    The light of heaven falls whole and white 
    And is not shattered into dyes, 
    The light for ever is morning light; 
    The hills are verdured pasture-wise; 
    The angel hosts with freshness go, 
    And seek with laughter what to brave;-- 
    And binding all is the hushed snow 
    Of the far-distant breaking wave. 
    And from a cliff-top is proclaimed 
    The gathering of the souls for birth, 
    The trial by existence named, 
    The obscuration upon earth. 
    And the slant spirits trooping by 
    In streams and cross- and counter-streams 
    Can but give ear to that sweet cry 
    For its suggestion of what dreams! 
    And the more loitering are turned 
    To view once more the sacrifice 
    Of those who for some good discerned 
    Will gladly give up paradise. 
    And a white shimmering concourse rolls 
    Toward the throne to witness there 
    The speeding of devoted souls 
    Which God makes his especial care. 
    And none are taken but who will, 
    Having first heard the life read out 
    That opens earthward, good and ill, 
    Beyond the shadow of a doubt; 
    And very beautifully God limns, 
    And tenderly, life's little dream, 
    But naught extenuates or dims, 
    Setting the thing that is supreme. 
    Nor is there wanting in the press 
    Some spirit to stand simply forth, 
    Heroic in its nakedness, 
    Against the uttermost of earth. 
    The tale of earth's unhonored things 
    Sounds nobler there than 'neath the sun; 
    And the mind whirls and the heart sings, 
    And a shout greets the daring one. 
    But always God speaks at the end: 
    'One thought in agony of strife 
    The bravest would have by for friend, 
    The memory that he chose the life; 
    But the pure fate to which you go 
    Admits no memory of choice, 
    Or the woe were not earthly woe 
    To which you give the assenting voice.' 
    And so the choice must be again, 
    But the last choice is still the same; 
    And the awe passes wonder then, 
    And a hush falls for all acclaim. 
    And God has taken a flower of gold 
    And broken it, and used therefrom 
    The mystic link to bind and hold 
    Spirit to matter till death come. 
    'Tis of the essence of life here, 
    Though we choose greatly, still to lack 
    The lasting memory at all clear, 
    That life has for us on the wrack 
    Nothing but what we somehow chose; 
    Thus are we wholly stripped of pride 
    In the pain that has but one close, 
    Bearing it crushed and mystified. 

In Equal Sacrifice

    THUS of old the Douglas did: 
    He left his land as he was bid 
    With the royal heart of Robert the Bruce 
    In a golden case with a golden lid, 
    To carry the same to the Holy Land; 
    By which we see and understand 
    That that was the place to carry a heart 
    At loyalty and love's command, 
    And that was the case to carry it in. 
    The Douglas had not far to win 
    Before he came to the land of Spain, 
    Where long a holy war had been 
    Against the too-victorious Moor; 
    And there his courage could not endure 
    Not to strike a blow for God 
    Before he made his errand sure. 
    And ever it was intended so, 
    That a man for God should strike a blow, 
    No matter the heart he has in charge 
    For the Holy Land where hearts should go. 
    But when in battle the foe were met, 
    The Douglas found him sore beset, 
    With only strength of the fighting arm 
    For one more battle passage yet-- 
    And that as vain to save the day 
    As bring his body safe away-- 
    Only a signal deed to do 
    And a last sounding word to say. 
    The heart he wore in a golden chain 
    He swung and flung forth into the plain, 
    And followed it crying 'Heart or death!' 
    And fighting over it perished fain. 
    So may another do of right, 
    Give a heart to the hopeless fight, 
    The more of right the more he loves; 
    So may another redouble might 
    For a few swift gleams of the angry brand, 
    Scorning greatly not to demand 
    In equal sacrifice with his 
    The heart he bore to the Holy Land. 

The Tuft of Flowers

    I WENT to turn the grass once after one 
    Who mowed it in the dew before the sun. 
    The dew was gone that made his blade so keen 
    Before I came to view the leveled scene. 
    I looked for him behind an isle of trees; 
    I listened for his whetstone on the breeze. 
    But he had gone his way, the grass all mown, 
    And I must be, as he had been,--alone, 
    'As all must be,' I said within my heart, 
    'Whether they work together or apart.' 
    But as I said it, swift there passed me by 
    On noiseless wing a 'wildered butterfly, 
    Seeking with memories grown dim o'er night 
    Some resting flower of yesterday's delight. 
    And once I marked his flight go round and round, 
    As where some flower lay withering on the ground. 
    And then he flew as far as eye could see, 
    And then on tremulous wing came back to me. 
    I thought of questions that have no reply, 
    And would have turned to toss the grass to dry; 
    But he turned first, and led my eye to look 
    At a tall tuft of flowers beside a brook, 
    A leaping tongue of bloom the scythe had spared 
    Beside a reedy brook the scythe had bared. 
    I left my place to know them by their name, 
    Finding them butterfly weed when I came. 
    The mower in the dew had loved them thus, 
    By leaving them to flourish, not for us, 
    Nor yet to draw one thought of ours to him. 
    But from sheer morning gladness at the brim. 
    The butterfly and I had lit upon, 
    Nevertheless, a message from the dawn, 
    That made me hear the wakening birds around, 
    And hear his long scythe whispering to the ground, 
    And feel a spirit kindred to my own; 
    So that henceforth I worked no more alone; 
    But glad with him, I worked as with his aid, 
    And weary, sought at noon with him the shade; 
    And dreaming, as it were, held brotherly speech 
    With one whose thought I had not hoped to reach. 
    'Men work together,' I told him from the heart, 
    'Whether they work together or apart.' 

Spoils of the Dead

    TWO fairies it was 
    On a still summer day 
    Came forth in the woods 
    With the flowers to play. 
    The flowers they plucked 
    They cast on the ground 
    For others, and those 
    For still others they found. 
    Flower-guided it was 
    That they came as they ran 
    On something that lay 
    In the shape of a man. 
    The snow must have made 
    The feathery bed 
    When this one fell 
    On the sleep of the dead. 
    But the snow was gone 
    A long time ago, 
    And the body he wore 
    Nigh gone with the snow. 
    The fairies drew near 
    And keenly espied 
    A ring on his hand 
    And a chain at his side. 
    They knelt in the leaves 
    And eerily played 
    With the glittering things, 
    And were not afraid. 
    And when they went home 
    To hide in their burrow, 
    They took them along 
    To play with to-morrow. 
    When you came on death, 
    Did you not come flower-guided 
    Like the elves in the wood? 
    I remember that I did. 
    But I recognised death 
    With sorrow and dread, 
    And I hated and hate 
    The spoils of the dead. 

Pan with Us

    PAN came out of the woods one day,-- 
    His skin and his hair and his eyes were gray, 
    The gray of the moss of walls were they,-- 
    And stood in the sun and looked his fill 
    At wooded valley and wooded hill. 
    He stood in the zephyr, pipes in hand, 
    On a height of naked pasture land; 
    In all the country he did command 
    He saw no smoke and he saw no roof. 
    That was well! and he stamped a hoof. 
    His heart knew peace, for none came here 
    To this lean feeding save once a year 
    Someone to salt the half-wild steer, 
    Or homespun children with clicking pails 
    Who see no little they tell no tales. 
    He tossed his pipes, too hard to teach 
    A new-world song, far out of reach, 
    For a sylvan sign that the blue jay's screech 
    And the whimper of hawks beside the sun 
    Were music enough for him, for one. 
    Times were changed from what they were: 
    Such pipes kept less of power to stir 
    The fruited bough of the juniper 
    And the fragile bluets clustered there 
    Than the merest aimless breath of air. 
    They were pipes of pagan mirth, 
    And the world had found new terms of worth. 
    He laid him down on the sun-burned earth 
    And ravelled a flower and looked away-- 
    Play? Play?--What should he play? 

The Demiurge's Laugh

    IT was far in the sameness of the wood; 
    I was running with joy on the Demon's trail, 
    Though I knew what I hunted was no true god. 
    It was just as the light was beginning to fail 
    That I suddenly heard--all I needed to hear: 
    It has lasted me many and many a year. 
    The sound was behind me instead of before, 
    A sleepy sound, but mocking half, 
    As of one who utterly couldn't care. 
    The Demon arose from his wallow to laugh, 
    Brushing the dirt from his eye as he went; 
    And well I knew what the Demon meant. 
    I shall not forget how his laugh rang out. 
    I felt as a fool to have been so caught, 
    And checked my steps to make pretence 
    It was something among the leaves I sought 
    (Though doubtful whether he stayed to see). 
    Thereafter I sat me against a tree. 

Now Close the Windows

    NOW close the windows and hush all the fields; 
    If the trees must, let them silently toss; 
    No bird is singing now, and if there is, 
    Be it my loss. 
    It will be long ere the marshes resume, 
    It will be long ere the earliest bird: 
    So close the windows and not hear the wind, 
    But see all wind-stirred. 


A Line-storm Song

    THE line-storm clouds fly tattered and swift, 
    The road is forlorn all day, 
    Where a myriad snowy quartz stones lift, 
    And the hoof-prints vanish away. 
    The roadside flowers, too wet for the bee, 
    Expend their bloom in vain. 
    Come over the hills and far with me, 
    And be my love in the rain. 
    The birds have less to say for themselves 
    In the wood-world's torn despair 
    Than now these numberless years the elves, 
    Although they are no less there: 
    All song of the woods is crushed like some 
    Wild, easily shattered rose. 
    Come, be my love in the wet woods; come, 
    Where the boughs rain when it blows. 
    There is the gale to urge behind 
    And bruit our singing down, 
    And the shallow waters aflutter with wind 
    From which to gather your gown. 
    What matter if we go clear to the west, 
    And come not through dry-shod? 
    For wilding brooch shall wet your breast 
    The rain-fresh goldenrod. 
    Oh, never this whelming east wind swells 
    But it seems like the sea's return 
    To the ancient lands where it left the shells 
    Before the age of the fern; 
    And it seems like the time when after doubt 
    Our love came back amain. 
    Oh, come forth into the storm and rout 
    And be my love in the rain. 

October

    O HUSHED October morning mild, 
    Thy leaves have ripened to the fall; 
    To-morrow's wind, if it be wild, 
    Should waste them all. 
    The crows above the forest call; 
    To-morrow they may form and go. 
    O hushed October morning mild, 
    Begin the hours of this day slow, 
    Make the day seem to us less brief. 
    Hearts not averse to being beguiled, 
    Beguile us in the way you know; 
    Release one leaf at break of day; 
    At noon release another leaf; 
    One from our trees, one far away; 
    Retard the sun with gentle mist; 
    Enchant the land with amethyst. 
    Slow, slow! 
    For the grapes' sake, if they were all, 
    Whose leaves already are burnt with frost, 
    Whose clustered fruit must else be lost-- 
    For the grapes' sake along the wall. 

My Butterfly

    THINE emulous fond flowers are dead, too, 
    And the daft sun-assaulter, he 
    That frighted thee so oft, is fled or dead: 
    Save only me 
    (Nor is it sad to thee!) 
    Save only me 
    There is none left to mourn thee in the fields. 
    The gray grass is not dappled with the snow; 
    Its two banks have not shut upon the river; 
    But it is long ago-- 
    It seems forever-- 
    Since first I saw thee glance, 
    With all the dazzling other ones, 
    In airy dalliance, 
    Precipitate in love, 
    Tossed, tangled, whirled and whirled above, 
    Like a limp rose-wreath in a fairy dance. 
    When that was, the soft mist 
    Of my regret hung not on all the land, 
    And I was glad for thee, 
    And glad for me, I wist. 
    Thou didst not know, who tottered, wandering on high, 
    That fate had made thee for the pleasure of the wind, 
    With those great careless wings, 
    Nor yet did I. 
    And there were other things: 
    It seemed God let thee flutter from his gentle clasp: 
    Then fearful he had let thee win 
    Too far beyond him to be gathered in, 
    Snatched thee, o'er eager, with ungentle grasp. 
    Ah! I remember me 
    How once conspiracy was rife 
    Against my life-- 
    The languor of it and the dreaming fond; 
    Surging, the grasses dizzied me of thought, 
    The breeze three odors brought, 
    And a gem-flower waved in a wand! 
    Then when I was distraught 
    And could not speak, 
    Sidelong, full on my cheek, 
    What should that reckless zephyr fling 
    But the wild touch of thy dye-dusty wing! 
    I found that wing broken to-day! 
    For thou are dead, I said, 
    And the strange birds say. 
    I found it with the withered leaves 
    Under the eaves. 

Reluctance
 
   OUT through the fields and the woods 
    And over the walls I have wended; 
    I have climbed the hills of view 
    And looked at the world, and descended; 
    I have come by the highway home, 
    And lo, it is ended. 
    The leaves are all dead on the ground, 
    Save those that the oak is keeping 
    To ravel them one by one 
    And let them go scraping and creeping 
    Out over the crusted snow, 
    When others are sleeping. 
    And the dead leaves lie huddled and still, 
    No longer blown hither and thither; 
    The last lone aster is gone; 
    The flowers of the witch-hazel wither; 
    The heart is still aching to seek, 
    But the feet question 'Whither?' 
    Ah, when to the heart of man 
    Was it ever less than a treason 
    To go with the drift of things, 
    To yield with a grace to reason, 
    And bow and accept tand accept the end 
    Of a love or a season? 









This etext was scanned by JC Byers and typed by L.M. Shaffer.
LMShaf@aol.com & jcbyers@capitalnet.com





                      The Brown Fairy Book
                                
                           Edited by
                          Andrew Lang
                                
                           Dedicated
                               to
                        Diana Scott Lang



Preface



The stories in this Fairy Book come from all quarters of the
world.  For example, the adventures of 'Ball-Carrier and the Bad
One' are told by Red Indian grandmothers to Red Indian children
who never go to school, nor see pen and ink.  'The Bunyip' is
known to even more uneducated little ones, running about with no
clothes at all in the bush, in Australia.  You may see
photographs of these merry little black fellows before their
troubles begin, in 'Northern Races of Central Australia,' by
Messrs. Spencer and Gillen.  They have no lessons except in
tracking and catching birds, beasts, fishes, lizards, and snakes,
all of which they eat.  But when they grow up to be big boys and
girls, they are cruelly cut about with stone knives and
frightened with sham bogies all for their good' their parents
say and I think they would rather go to school, if they had their
choice, and take their chance of being birched and bullied. 
However, many boys might think it better fun to begin to learn
hunting as soon as they can walk.  Other stories, like 'The
Sacred Milk of Koumongoe,' come from the Kaffirs in Africa, whose
dear papas are not so poor as those in Australia, but have plenty
of cattle and milk, and good mealies to eat, and live in houses
like very big bee-hives, and wear clothes of a sort, though not
very like our own.  'Pivi and Kabo' is a tale from the brown
people in the island of New Caledonia, where a boy is never
allowed to speak to or even look at his own sisters; nobody knows
why, so curious are the manners of this remote island.  The story
shows the advantages of good manners and pleasant behaviour; and
the natives do not now cook and eat each other, but live on fish,
vegetables, pork, and chickens, and dwell in houses.  'What the
Rose did to the Cypress,' is a story from Persia, where the
people, of course, are civilised, and much like those of whom you
read in 'The Arabian Nights.'  Then there are tales like 'The Fox
and the Lapp ' from the very north of Europe, where it is dark
for half the year and day-light for the other half.  The Lapps
are a people not fond of soap and water, and very much given to
art magic.  Then there are tales from India, told to Major
Campbell, who wrote them out, by Hindoos; these stories are 'Wali
Dad the Simple-hearted,' and 'The King who would be Stronger than
Fate,' but was not so clever as his daughter.  From Brazil, in
South America, comes 'The Tortoise and the Mischievous Monkey,'
with the adventures of other animals.  Other tales are told in
various parts of Europe, and in many languages; but all people,
black, white, brown, red, and yellow, are like each other when
they tell stories; for these are meant for children, who like the
same sort of thing, whether they go to school and wear clothes,
or, on the other hand, wear skins of beasts, or even nothing at
all, and live on grubs and lizards and hawks and crows and
serpents, like the little Australian blacks.

The tale of 'What the Rose did to the Cypress,' is translated out
of a Persian manuscript by Mrs. Beveridge.  'Pivi and Kabo' is
translated by the Editor from a French version; 'Asmund and
Signy' by Miss Blackley; the Indian stories by Major Campbell,
and all the rest are told by Mrs. Lang, who does not give them
exactly as they are told by all sorts of outlandish natives, but
makes them up in the hope white people will like them, skipping
the pieces which they will not like.  That is how this Fairy Book
was made up for your entertainment.




Contents



What the Rose did to the Cypress
Ball-Carrier and the Bad One
How Ball-Carrier finished his Task
The Bunyip
Father Grumbler
The Story of the Yara
The Cunning Hare
The Turtle and his Bride
How Geirald the Coward was Punished
Habogi
How the Little Brother set Free his Big Brothers
The Sacred Milk of Koumongoe
The Wicked Wolverine
The Husband of the Rat's Daughter
The Mermaid and the Boy
Pivi and Kabo
The Elf Maiden
How Some Wild Animals became Tame Ones
Fortune and the Wood-Cutter
The Enchanted Head
The Sister of the Sun
The Prince and the Three Fates
The Fox and the Lapp
Kisa the Cat
The Lion and the Cat
Which was the Foolishest?
Asmund and Signy
Rubezahl
Story of the King who would be Stronger then Fate
Story of Wali Dad the Simple-hearted
Tale of a Tortoise and of a Mischievous Monkey
The Knights of the Fish







                      The Brown Fairy Book




What the Rose did to the Cypress[FN#1]



Once upon a time a great king of the East, named
Saman-lalposh,[FN#2] had three brave and clever sons--Tahmasp,
Qamas, and Almas-ruh-baksh.[FN#3] One day, when the king was
sitting in his hall of audience, his eldest son, Prince Tahmasp,
came before him, and after greeting his father with due respect,
said: 'O my royal father!  I am tired of the town; if you will
give me leave, I will take my servants to-morrow and will go into
the country and hunt on the hill-skirts; and when I have taken
some game I will come back, at evening-prayer time.'  His father
consented, and sent with him some of his own trusted servants,
and also hawks, and falcons, hunting dogs, cheetahs and leopards.

At the place where the prince intended to hunt he saw a most
beautiful deer.  He ordered that it should not be killed, but
trapped or captured with a noose.  The deer looked about for a
place where he might escape from the ring of the beaters, and
spied one unwatched close to the prince himself.  It bounded high
and leaped right over his head, got out of the ring, and tore
like the eastern wind into the waste.  The prince put spurs to
his horse and pursued it; and was soon lost to the sight of his
followers.  Until the world-lighting sun stood above his head in
the zenith he did not take his eyes off the deer; suddenly it
disappeared behind some rising ground, and with all his search he
could not find any further trace of it.  He was now drenched in
sweat, and he breathed with pain; and his horse's tongue hung
from its mouth with thirst.  He dismounted and toiled on, with
bridle on arm, praying and casting himself on the mercy of
heaven.  Then his horse fell and surrendered its life to God.  On
and on he went across the sandy waste, weeping and with burning
breast, till at length a hill rose into sight.  He mustered his
strength and climbed to the top, and there he found a giant tree
whose foot kept firm the wrinkled earth, and whose crest touched
the very heaven.  Its branches had put forth a glory of leaves,
and there were grass and a spring underneath it, and flowers of
many colours.

Gladdened by this sight, he dragged himself to the water's edge,
drank his fill, and returned thanks for his deliverance from
thirst.

He looked about him and, to his amazement, saw close by a royal
seat.  While he was pondering what could have brought this into
the merciless desert, a man drew near who was dressed like a
faqir, and had bare head and feet, but walked with the free
carriage of a person of rank.  His face was kind, and wise and
thoughtful, and he came on and spoke to the prince.

'O good youth! how did you come here?  Who are you?  Where do you
come from?'

The prince told everything just as it had happened to him, and
then respectfully added: 'I have made known my own circumstances
to you, and now I venture to beg you to tell me your own.  Who
are you?  How did you come to make your dwelling in this
wilderness?'

To this the faqir replied: 'O youth! it would be best for you to
have nothing to do with me and to know nothing of my fortunes,
for my story is fit neither for telling nor for hearing.'  The
prince, however, pleaded so hard to be told, that at last there
was nothing to be done but to let him hear.

'Learn and know, O young man! that I am King Janangir[FN#4] of
Babylon, and that once I had army and servants, family and
treasure; untold wealth and belongings.  The Most High God gave
me seven sons who grew up well versed in all princely arts.  My
eldest son heard from travellers that in Turkistan, on the
Chinese frontier, there is a king named Quimus, the son of Timus,
and that he has an only child, a daughter named Mihr-afruz,[FN#5]
who, under all the azure heaven, is unrivalled for beauty. 
Princes come from all quarters to ask her hand, and on one and
all she imposes a condition.  She says to them: "I know a riddle;
and I will marry anyone who answers it, and will bestow on him
all my possessions.  But if a suitor cannot answer my question I
cut off his head and hang it on the battlements of the citadel."
The riddle she asks is, "What did the rose do to the cypress?"

'Now, when my son heard this tale, he fell in love with that
unseen girl, and he came to me lamenting and bewailing himself. 
Nothing that I could say had the slightest effect on him.  I
said: "Oh my son! if there must be fruit of this fancy of yours,
I will lead forth a great army against King Quimus.  If he will
give you his daughter freely, well and good; and if not, I will
ravage his kingdom and bring her away by force." This plan did
not please him; he said: "It is not right to lay a kingdom waste
and to destroy a palace so that I may attain my desire.  I will
go alone; I will answer the riddle, and win her in this way." At
last, out of pity for him, I let him go.  He reached the city of
King Quimus.  He was asked the riddle and could not give the true
answer; and his head was cut off and hung upon the battlements. 
Then I mourned him in black raiment for forty days.

After this another and another of my sons were seized by the same
desire, and in the end all my seven sons went, and all were
killed.  In grief for their death I have abandoned my throne, and
I abide here in this desert, withholding my hand from all State
business and wearing myself away in sorrow.'

Prince Tahmasp listened to this tale, and then the arrow of love
for that unseen girl struck his heart also.  Just at this moment
of his ill-fate his people came up, and gathered round him like
moths round a light.  They brought him a horse, fleet as the
breeze of the dawn; he set his willing foot in the stirrup of
safety and rode off.  As the days went by the thorn of love
rankled in his heart, and he became the very example of lovers,
and grew faint and feeble.  At last his confidants searched his
heart and lifted the veil from the face of his love, and then set
the matter before his father, King Saman-lal-posh.  'Your son,
Prince Tahmasp, loves distractedly the Princess Mihr-afruz,
daughter of King Quimus, son of Timus.'  Then they told the king
all about her and her doings.  A mist of sadness clouded the
king's mind, and he said to his son: 'If this thing is so, I will
in the first place send a courier with friendly letters to King
Quimus, and will ask the hand of his daughter for you.  I will
send an abundance of gifts, and a string of camels laden with
flashing stones and rubies of Badakhsham In this way I will bring
her and her suite, and I will give her to you to be your solace. 
But if King Quimus is unwilling to give her to you, I will pour a
whirlwind of soldiers upon him, and I will bring to you, in this
way, that most consequential of girls.'  But the prince said that
this plan would not be right, and that he would go himself, and
would answer the riddle.  Then the king's wise men said: 'This is
a very weighty matter; it would be best to allow the prince to
set out accompanied by some persons in whom you have confidence. 
Maybe he will repent and come back.'  So King Saman ordered all
preparations for the journey to be made, and then Prince Tahmasp
took his leave and set out, accompanied by some of the courtiers,
and taking with him a string of two-humped and raven-eyed camels
laden with jewels, and gold, and costly stuffs.

By stage after stage, and after many days' journeying, he arrived
at the city of King Quimus.  What did he see?  A towering citadel
whose foot kept firm the wrinkled earth, and whose battlements
touched the blue heaven.  He saw hanging from its battlements
many heads, but it had not the least effect upon him that these
were heads of men of rank; he listened to no advice about laying
aside his fancy, but rode up to the gate and on into the heart of
the city.  The place was so splendid that the eyes of the ages
have never seen its like, and there, in an open square, he found
a tent of crimson satin set up, and beneath it two jewelled drums
with jewelled sticks.  These drums were put there so that the
suitors of the princess might announce their arrival by beating
on them, after which some one would come and take them to the
king's presence.  The sight of the drums stirred the fire of
Prince Tahmasp's love.  He dismounted, and moved towards them;
but his companions hurried after and begged him first to let them
go and announce him to the king, and said that then, when they
had put their possessions in a place of security, they would
enter into the all important matter of the princess.  The prince,
however, replied that he was there for one thing only; that his
first duty was to beat the drums and announce himself as a
suitor, when he would be taken, as such, to the king, who would
then give him proper lodgment.  So he struck upon the drums, and
at once summoned an officer who took him to King Quimus.

When the king saw how very young the prince looked, and that he
was still drinking of the fountain of wonder, he said: 'O youth!
leave aside this fancy which my daughter has conceived in the
pride of her beauty.  No one can answer er her riddle, and she
has done to death many men who had had no pleasure in life nor
tasted its charms.  God forbid that your spring also should be
ravaged by the autumn winds of martyrdom.'  All his urgency,
however, had no effect in making the prince withdraw.  At length
it was settled between them that three days should be given to
pleasant hospitality and that then should follow what had to be
said and done.  Then the prince went to his own quarters and was
treated as became his station.

King Quimus now sent for his daughter and for her mother,
Gulrukh,[FN#6] and talked to them.  He said to Mibrafruz: '
Listen to me, you cruel flirt!  Why do you persist in this folly? 
Now there has come to ask your hand a prince of the east, so
handsome that the very sun grows modest before the splendour of
his face; he is rich, and he has brought gold and jewels, all for
you, if you will marry him.  A better husband you will not find.'

But all the arguments of father and mother were wasted, for her
only answer was: 'O my father!  I have sworn to myself that I
will not marry, even if a thousand years go by, unless someone
answers my riddle, and that I will give myself to that man only
who does answer it.'

The three days passed; then the riddle was asked: 'What did the
rose do to the cypress?'  The prince had an eloquent tongue,
which could split a hair, and without hesitation he replied to
her with a verse: 'Only the Omnipotent has knowledge of secrets;
if any man says, " I know " do not believe him.'

Then a servant fetched in the polluted, blue-eyed headsman, who
asked: 'Whose sun of life has come near its setting?' took the
prince by the arm, placed him upon the cloth of execution, and
then, all merciless and stony hearted, cut his head from his body
and hung it on the battlements.

The news of the death of Prince Tahmasp plunged his father into
despair and stupefaction.  He mourned for him in black raiment
for forty days; and then, a few days later, his second son,
Prince Qamas, extracted from him leave to go too; and he, also,
was put to death.  One son only now remained, the brave,
eloquent, happy-natured Prince Almas-ruh-bakhsh.  One day, when
his father sat brooding over his lost children, Almas came before
him and said: 'O father mine! the daughter of King Quimus has
done my two brothers to death; I wish to avenge them upon her.' 
These words brought his father to tears.  'O light of your
father! ' he cried, 'I have no one left but you, and now you ask
me to let you go to your death.'

'Dear father!' pleaded the prince, 'until I have lowered the
pride of that beauty, and have set her here before you, I cannot
settle down or indeed sit down off my feet.'

In the end he, too, got leave to go; but he went a without a
following and alone.  Like his brothers, he made the long journey
to the city of Quimus the son of Timus; like them he saw the
citadel, but he saw there the heads of Tahmasp and Qamas.  He
went about in the city, saw the tent and the drums, and then went
out again to a village not far off.  Here he found out a very old
man who had a wife 120 years old, or rather more.  Their lives
were coming to their end, but they had never beheld face of child
of their own.  They were glad when the prince came to their
house, and they dealt with him as with a son.  He put all his
belongings into their charge, and fastened his horse in their
out-house.  Then he asked them not to speak of him to anyone, and
to keep his affairs secret.  He exchanged his royal dress for
another, and next morning, just as the sun looked forth from its
eastern oratory, he went again into the city.  He turned over in
his mind without ceasing how he was to find out the meaning of
the riddle, and to give them a right answer, and who could help
him, and how to avenge his brothers.  He wandered about the city,
but heard nothing of service, for there was no one in all that
land who understood the riddle of Princess Mihr-afruz.

One day he thought he would go to her own palace and see if he
could learn anything there, so he went out to her garden-house. 
It was a very splendid place, with a wonderful gateway, and walls
like Alexander's ramparts.  Many gate-keepers were on guard, and
there was no chance of passing them.  His heart was full of
bitterness, but he said to himself: 'All will be well! it is here
I shall get what I want.'  He went round outside the garden wall
hoping to find a gap, and he made supplication in the Court of
Supplications and prayed, 'O Holder of the hand of the helpless!
show me my way.'

While he prayed he bethought himself that he could get into the
garden with a stream of inflowing water.  He looked carefully
round, fearing to be seen, stripped, slid into the stream and was
carried within the great walls.  There he hid himself till his
loin cloth was dry.  The garden was a very Eden, with running
water amongst its lawns, with flowers and the lament of doves and
the jug-jug of nightingales.  It was a place to steal the senses
from the brain, and he wandered about and saw the house, but
there seemed to be no one there.  In the forecourt was a royal
seat of polished jasper, and in the middle of the platform was a
basin of purest water that flashed like a mirror.  He pleased
himself with these sights for a while, and then went back to the
garden and hid himself from the gardeners and passed the night. 
Next morning he put on the appearance of a madman and wandered
about till he came to a lawn where several pert-faced girls were
amusing themselves.  On a throne, jewelled and overspread with
silken stuffs, sat a girl the splendour of whose beauty lighted
up the place, and whose ambergris and attar perfumed the whole
air.  'That must be Mihrafruz,' he thought, 'she is indeed
lovely.'  Just then one of the attendants came to the water's
edge to fill a cup, and though the prince was in hiding, his face
was reflected in the water.  When she saw this image she was
frightened, and let her cup fall into the stream, and thought,
'Is it an angel, or a peri, or a man?' Fear and trembling took
hold of her, and she screamed as women scream.  Then some of the
other girls came and took her to the princess who asked: 'What is
the matter, pretty one?'

'O princess! I went for water, and I saw an image, and I was
afraid.'  So another girl went to the water and saw the same
thing, and came back with the same story.  The princess wished to
see for herself; she rose and paced to the spot with the march of
a prancing peacock.  When she saw the image she said to her
nurse: 'Find out who is reflected in the water, and where he
lives.'  Her words reached the prince's ear, he lifted up his
head; she saw him and beheld beauty such as she had never seen
before.  She lost a hundred hearts to him, and signed to her
nurse to bring him to her presence.  The prince let himself be
persuaded to go with the nurse, but when the princess questioned
him as to who he was and how he had got into her garden, he
behaved like a man out of his mind--sometimes smiling, sometimes
crying, and saying: ' I am hungry,'Or words misplaced and random,
civil mixed with the rude.

'What a pity!' said the princess, 'he is mad!' As she liked him
she said: 'He is my madman; let no one hurt him.'  She took him
to her house and told him not to go away, for that she would
provide for all his wants.  The prince thought, 'It would be
excellent if here, in her very house, I could get the answer to
her riddle; but I must be silent, on pain of death.'

Now in the princess's household there was a girl called
Dil-aram[FN#7]; she it was who had first seen the image of the
prince.  She came to love him very much, and she spent day and
night thinking how she could make her affection known to him. 
One day she escaped from the princess's notice and went to the
prince, and laid her head on his feet and said: ' Heaven has
bestowed on you beauty and charm.  Tell me your secret; who are
you, and how did you come here?  I love you very much, and if you
would like to leave this place I will go with you.  I have wealth
equal to the treasure of the miserly Qarun.'  But the prince only
made answer like a man distraught, and told her nothing.  He said
to himself, ' God forbid that the veil should be taken in vain
from my secret; that would indeed disgrace me.'  So, with
streaming eyes and burning breast, Dil-aram arose and went to her
house and lamented and fretted.

Now whenever the princess commanded the prince's attendance,
Dil-aram, of all the girls, paid him attention and waited on him
best.  The princess noticed this, and said: 'O Dil-aram! you must
take my madman into your charge and give him whatever he wants.' 
This was the very thing Dil- aram had prayed for.  A little later
she took the prince into a private place and she made him take an
oath of secrecy, and she herself took one and swore, ' By Heaven!
I will not tell your secret.  Tell me all about yourself so that
I may help you to get what you want.'  The prince now recognised
in her words the perfume of true love, and he made compact with
her.  'O lovely girl! I want to know what the rose did to the
cypress.  Your mistress cuts off men's heads because of this
riddle; what is at the bottom of it, and why does she do it?'
Then Dil-aram answered: ' If you will promise to marry me and to
keep me always amongst those you favour, I will tell you all I
know, and I will keep watch about the riddle.'

'O lovely girl,' rejoined he, 'if I accomplish my purpose, so
that I need no longer strive for it, I will keep my compact with
you.  When I have this woman in my power and have avenged my
brothers, I will make you my solace.'

'O wealth of my life and source of my joy!' responded Dil-aram,
'I do not know what the rose did to the cypress; but so much I
know that the person who told Mihr-afruz about it is a negro whom
she hides under her throne.  He fled here from Waq of the
Caucasus--it is there you must make inquiry; there is no other
way of getting at the truth.'On hearing these words, the prince
said to his heart, 'O my heart! your task will yet wear away much
of your life.'

He fell into long and far thought, and Dil-aram looked at him and
said: 'O my life and my soul! do not be sad.  If you would like
this woman killed, I will put poison into her cup so that she
will never lift her head from her drugged sleep again.'

'O Dil-aram! such a vengeance is not manly.  I shall not rest
till I have gone to Waq of the Caucasus and have cleared up the
matter.'  Then they repeated the agreement about their marriage,
and bade one another goodbye.

The prince now went back to the village, and told the old man
that he was setting out on a long journey, and begged him not to
be anxious, and to keep safe the goods which had been entrusted
to him.

The prince had not the least knowledge of the way to Waq of the
Caucasus, and was cast down by the sense of his helplessness.  He
was walking along by his horse's side when there appeared before
him an old man of serene countenance, dressed in green and
carrying a staff, who resembled Khizr.[FN#8] The prince thanked
heaven, laid the hands of reverence on his breast and salaamed. 
The old man returned the greeting graciously, and asked: 'How
fare you?  Whither are you bound?  You look like a traveller.'

'O revered saint!  I am in this difficulty: I do not know the way
to Waq of the Caucasus.'  The old man of good counsel looked at
the young prince and said: 'Turn back from this dangerous
undertaking.  Do not go; choose some other task!  If you had a
hundred lives you would not bring one out safe from this
journey.'  But his words had no effect on the prince's resolve. 
'What object have you,' the old man asked, 'in thus consuming
your life?'

'I have an important piece of business to do, and only this
journey makes it possible.  I must go; I pray you, ill God's
name, tell me the way.'

When the saint saw that the prince was not to be moved, he said:
' Learn and know, O youth! that Waq of Qaf is in the Caucasus and
is a dependency of it.  In it there are jins, demons, and peris. 
You must go on along this road till it forks into three; take
neither the right hand nor the left, but the middle path.  Follow
this for a day and a night.  Then you will come to a column on
which is a marble slab inscribed with Cufic characters.  Do what
is written there; beware of disobedience.'  Then he gave his good
wishes for the journey and his blessing, and the prince kissed
his [Bet, said good-bye, and, with thanks to the Causer of
Causes, took the road.

After a day and a night he saw the column rise in silent beauty
to the heavens.  Everything was as the wise old man had said it
would be, and the prince, who was skilled in all tongues, read
the following Cufic inscription: 'O travellers! be it known to
you that this column has been set up with its tablet to give true
directions about these roads.  If a man would pass his life in
ease and pleasantness, let him take the right-hand path.  If he
take the left, he will have some trouble, but he will reach his
goal without much delay.  Woe to him who chooses the middle path!
if he had a thousand lives he would not save one; it is very
hazardous; it leads to the Caucasus, and is an endless road. 
Beware of it!'

The prince read and bared his head and lifted his hands in
supplication to Him who has no needs, and prayed, 'O Friend of
the traveller! I, Thy servant, come to Thee for succour.  My
purpose lies in the land of Qaf and my road is full of peril. 
Lead me by it.'  Then he took a handful of earth and cast it on
his collar, and said: 'O earth! be thou my grave; and O vest! tee
thou my winding-sheet!' Then he took the middle road and went
along it, day after day, with many a silent prayer, till he saw
trees rise from the weary waste of sand.  They grew in a garden,
and he went up to the gate and found it a slab of beautifully
worked marble, and that near it there lay sleeping, with his head
on a stone, a negro whose face was so black that it made darkness
round him.  His upper lip, arched like an eyebrow, curved upwards
to his nostrils and his lower hung down like a camel's.  Four
millstones formed his shield, and on a box- tree close by hung
his giant sword.  His loin-cloth was fashioned of twelve skins of
beasts, and was bound round his waist by a chain of which each
link was as big as an elephant's thigh.

The prince approached and tied up his horse near the negro's
head.  Then he let fall the Bismillah from his lips, entered the
garden and walked through it till he came to the private part,
delighting in the great trees, the lovely verdure, and the
flowery borders.  In the inner garden there were very many deer. 
These signed to him with eye and foot to go back, for that this
was enchanted ground; but he did not understand them, and thought
their pretty gestures were a welcome.  After a while he reached a
palace which had a porch more splendid than Caesar's, and was
built of gold and silver bricks.  In its midst was a high seat,
overlaid with fine carpets, and into it opened eight doors, each
having opposite to it a marble basin.

Banishing care, Prince Almas walked on through the garden, when
suddenly a window opened and a girl, who was lovely enough to
make the moon writhe with jealousy, put out her head.  She lost
her heart to the good looks of the prince, and sent her nurse to
fetch him so that she might learn where he came from and how he
had got into her private garden where even lions and wolves did
not venture.  The nurse went, and was struck with amazement at
the sun-like radiance of his face; she salaamed and said: 'O
youth! welcome! the lady of the garden calls you; come!' He went
with her and into a palace which was like a house in Paradise,
and saw seated on the royal carpets of the throne a girl whose
brilliance shamed the shining sun.  He salaamed; she rose, took
him by the hand and placed him near her.  'O young man! who are
you?  Where do you come from?  How did you get into this garden?'
He told her his story from beginning to end, and Lady
Latifa[FN#9]  replied: 'This is folly! It will make you a
vagabond of the earth, and lead you to destruction.  Come, cease
such talk! No one can go to the Caucasus.  Stay with me and be
thankful, for here is a throne which you can share with me, and
in my society you can enjoy my wealth.  I will do whatever you
wish; I will bring here King Qulmus and his daughter, and you can
deal with them as you will.'

'O Lady Latifa,' he said, 'I have made a compact with heaven not
to sit down off my feet till I have been to Waq of Qaf and have
cleared up this matter, and have taken Mihr- afruz from her
father, as brave men take, and have put her in prison.  When I
have done all this I will come back to you in state and with a
great following, and I will marry you according to the law.' 
Lady Latifa argued and urged her wishes, but in vain; the prince
was not to be moved.  Then she called to the cupbearers for new
wine, for she thought that when his head was hot with it he might
consent to stay.  The pure, clear wine was brought; she filled a
cup and gave to him.  He said: 'O most enchanting sweetheart! it
is the rule for the host to drink first and then the guest.'  So
to make him lose his head, she drained the cup; then filled it
again and gave him.  He drank it off, and she took a lute from
one of the singers and played upon it with skill which witched
away the sense of all who heard.  But it was all in vain; three
days passed in such festivities, and on the fourth the prince
said: 'O joy of my eyes! I beg now that you will bid me farewell,
for my way is long and the fire of your love darts flame into the
harvest of my heart.  By heaven's grace I may accomplish my
purpose, and, if so, I will come back to you.'

Now she saw that she could not in any way change his resolve, she
told her nurse to bring a certain casket which contained, she
said, something exhilarating which would help the prince on his
journey.  The box was brought, and she divided off a portion of
what was within and gave it to the prince to eat.  Then, and
while he was all unaware, she put forth her hand to a stick
fashioned like a snake; she said some words over it and struck
him so sharply on the shoulder that he cried out; then he made a
pirouette and found that he was a deer.

When he knew what had been done to him he thought, 'All the
threads of affliction are gathered together; I have lost my last
chance!' He tried to escape, but the magician sent for her
goldsmith, who, coming, overlaid the deer-horns with gold and
jewels.  The kerchief which that day she had had in her hand was
then tied round its neck, and this freed it from her attentions.

The prince-deer now bounded into the garden and at once sought
some way of escape.  It found none, and it joined the other deer,
which soon made it their leader.  Now, although the prince had
been transformed into the form of a deer, he kept his man's heart
and mind.  He said to himself, 'Thank heaven that the Lady Latifa
has changed me into this shape, for at least deer are beautiful.' 
He remained for some time living as a deer amongst the rest, but
at length resolved that an end to such a life must be put ill
some way.  He looked again for some place by which he could get
out of the magic garden.  Following round the wall he reached a
lower part; he remembered the Divine Names and flung himself
over, saying, 'Whatever happens is by the will of God.'  When he
looked about he found that he was in the very same place he had
jumped from; there was the palace, there the garden and the deer! 
Eight times he leaped over the wall and eight times found himself
where he had started from; but after the ninth leap there was a
change, there was a palace and there was a garden, but the deer
were gone.

Presently a girl of such moon-like beauty opened a window that
the prince lost to her a hundred hearts.  She was delighted with
the beautiful deer, and cried to her nurse: 'Catch it! if you
will I will give you this necklace, every pearl of which is worth
a kingdom.'  The nurse coveted the pearls, but as she was three
hundred years old she did not know how she could catch a deer. 
However, she went down into the garden and held out some grass,
but when she went near the creature ran away.  The girl watched
with great excitement from the palace window, and called: 'O
nurse, if you don't catch it, I will kill you!' 'I am killing
myself,' shouted back the old woman.  The girl saw that nurse
tottering along and went down to help, marching with the gait of
a prancing peacock.  When she saw the gilded horns and the
kerchief she said: 'It must be accustomed to the hand, and be
some royal pet!' The prince had it in mind that this might be
another magician who could give him some other shape, but still
it seemed best to allow himself to be caught.  So he played about
the girl and let her catch him by the neck.  A leash was brought,
fruits were given, and it was caressed with delight.  It was
taken to the palace and tied at the foot of the Lady Jamila's
raised seat, but she ordered a longer cord to be brought so that
it might be able to jump up beside her.

When the nurse went to fix the cord she saw tears falling from
its eyes, and that it was dejected and sorrowful 'O Lady Jamila!
this is a wonderful deer, it is crying; I never saw a deer cry
before.'  Jamila darted down like a flash of lightning, and saw
that it was so.  It rubbed its head on her feet and then shook it
so sadly that the girl cried for sympathy.  She patted it and
said: 'Why are you sad, my heart?  Why do you cry, my soul?  Is
it because I have caught you?  I love you better than my own
life.'  But, spite of her comforting, it cried the more.  Then
Jamila said: 'Unless I am mistaken, this is the work of my wicked
sister Latifa, who by magic art turns servants of God into beasts
of the field.'  At these words the deer uttered sounds, and laid
its head on her feet.  Then Jamila was sure it was a man, and
said: ' Be comforted, I will restore you to your own shape.'  She
bathed herself and ordered the deer to be bathed, put on clean
raiment, called for a box which stood in an alcove, opened it and
gave a portion of what was in it to the deer to eat.  Then she
slipped her hand under her carpet and produced a stick to which
she said something.  She struck the deer hard, it pirouetted and
became Prince Almas.

The broidered kerchief and the jewels lay upon the ground.  The
prince prostrated himself in thanks to heaven and Jamila, and
said: 'O delicious person! O Chinese Venus! how shall I excuse
myself for giving you so much trouble?  With what words can I
thank you?' Then she called for a clothes-wallet and chose out a
royal dress of honour.  Her attendants dressed him in it, and
brought him again before the tender-hearted lady.  She turned to
him a hundred hearts, took his hand and seated him beside her,
and said: 'O youth! tell me truly who you are and where you come
from, and how you fell into the power of my sister.'

Even when he was a deer the prince had much admired Jamila now he
thought her a thousand times more lovely than before.  He judged
that in truth alone was safety, and so told her his whole story. 
Then she asked: 'O Prince Almas-ruh-bakhsh, do you still wish so
much to make this journey to Waq of Qaf?  What hope is there in
it?  The road is dangerous even near here, and this is not yet
the borderland of the Caucasus.  Come, give it up!  It is a great
risk, and to go is not wise.  It would be a pity for a man like
you to fall into the hands of jins and demons.  Stay with me, and
I will do whatever you wish.'

'O most delicious person!' he answered, 'you are very generous,
and the choice of my life lies in truth in your hands; but I beg
one favour of you.  If you love me, so do I too love you.  If you
really love me, do not forbid me to make this journey, but help
me as far as you can.  Then it may be that I shall succeed, and
if I return with my purpose fulfilled I will marry you according
to the law, and take you to my own country, and we will spend the
rest of our lives together in pleasure and good companionship. 
Help me, if you can, and give me your counsel.'

'O very stuff of my life,' replied Jamila 'I will give you things
that are not in kings' treasuries, and which will be of the
greatest use to you.  First, there are the bow and arrows of his
Reverence the Prophet Salih.  Secondly, there is the Scorpion of
Solomon (on whom be peace), which is a sword such as no king has;
steel and stone are one to it; if you bring it down on a rock it
will not be injured, and it will cleave whatever you strike. 
Thirdly, there is the dagger which the sage Timus himself made;
this is most useful, and the man who wears it would not bend
under seven camels' loads.  What you have to do first is to get
to the home of the Simurgh,[FN#10] and to make friends with him. 
If he favours you, he will take you to Waq of Qaf; if not, you
will never get there, for seven seas are on the way, and they are
such seas that if all the kings of the earth, and all their
wazirs, and all their wise men considered for a thousand years,
they would not be able to cross them.'

'O most delicious person! where is the Simurgh's home?  How shall
I get there?'

'O new fruit of life! you must just do what I tell you, and you
must use your eyes and your brains, for if you don't you will
find yourself at the place of the negroes, who are a bloodthirsty
set; and God forbid they should lay hands on your precious
person.'

Then she took the bow and quiver of arrows, the sword, and the
dagger out of a box, and the prince let fall a Bismillah, and
girt them all on.  Then Jamila of the houri-face, produced two
saddle-bags of ruby-red silk, one filled with roasted fowl and
little cakes, and the other with stones of price.  Next she gave
him a horse as swift as the breeze of the morning, and she said:
' Accept all these things from me; ride till you come to a rising
ground, at no great distance from here, where there is a spring. 
It is called the Place of Gifts, and you must stay there one
night.  There you will see many wild beasts--lions, tigers,
leopards, apes, and so on.  Before you get there you must capture
some game.  On the long road beyond there dwells a lion-king,
alla if other beasts did not fear him they would ravage the whole
country and let no one pass.  The lion is a red transgressor, so
when he comes rise and do him reverence; take a cloth and rub the
dust and earth from his face, then set the game you have taken
before him, well cleansed, and lay the hands of respect on your
breast.  When he wishes to eat, take your knife and cut pieces of
the meat and set them before him with a bow.  In this way you
will enfold that lion-king in perfect friendship, and he will be
most useful to you, and you will be safe from molestation by the
negroes.  When you go on from the Place of Gifts, be sure you do
not take the right-hand road; take the left, for the other leads
by the negro castle, which is known as the Place of Clashing
Swords, and where there are forty negro captains each over three
thousand or four thousand more.  Their chief is Taramtaq.[FN#11] 
Further on than this is the home of the Simurgh.'

Having stored these things in the prince's memory, she said: 'You
will see everything happen just as I have said.'  Then she
escorted him a little way; they parted, and she went home to
mourn his absence.

Prince Almas, relying on the Causer of Causes, rode on to the
Place of Gifts and dismounted at the platform.  Everything
happened just as Jamila had foretold; when one or two watches of
the night had passed, he saw that the open ground around him was
full of such stately and splendid animals as he had never seen
before.  By-and-by, they made way for a wonderfully big lion,
which was eighty yards from nose to tail-tip, and was a
magnificent creature.  The prince advanced and saluted it; it
proudly drooped its head and forelocks and paced to the platform. 
Seventy or eighty others were with it, and now encircled it at a
little distance.  It laid its right paw over its left, and the
prince took the kerchief Jamila had given him for the purpose,
and rubbed the dust and earth from its face; then brought forward
the game he had prepared, and crossing his hands respectfully on
his breast stood waiting before it.  When it wished for food he
cut off pieces of the meat and put them in its mouth.  The
serving lions also came near and the prince would have stayed his
hand, but the king-lion signed to him to feed them too.  This he
did, laying the meat on the platform.  Then the king-lion
beckoned the prince to come near and said: 'Sleep at ease; my
guards will watch.'.  So, surrounded by the lion-guard, he slept
till dawn, when the king lion said good-bye, and gave him a few
of his own hairs and said: 'When you are in any difficulty, burn
one of these and I will be there.'  Then it went off into the
jungle.

Prince Almas immediately started; he rode till he came to the
parting of the ways.  He remembered quite well that the
right-hand way was short and dangerous, but he bethought himself
too that whatever was written on his forehead would happen, and
took the forbidden road.  By-and-by he saw a castle, and knew
from what Jamila had told him that it was the Place of Clashing
Swords.  He would have liked to go back by the way ho had come,
but courage forbade, and he said, 'What has been preordained from
eternity will happen to me,' and went on towards the castle.  He
was thinking of tying his horse to a tree which grew near the
gate when a negro came out and spied him.  ' Ha!' said the wretch
to himself, 'this is good; Taram-taq has not eaten man-meat for a
long time, and is craving for some.  I will take this creature to
him.'  He took hold of the prince's reins, and said: 'Dismount,
man-child!  Come to my master.  He has wanted to eat man-meat
this long time back.'  'What nonsense are you saying?' said the
prince, and other such words.  When the negro understood that he
was being abused, he cried: 'Come along! I will put you into such
a state that the birds of the air will weep for you.'  Then the
prince drew the Scorpion of So]omon and struck him--struck him on
the leathern belt and shore him through so that the sword came
out on the other side.  He stood upright for a little while,
muttered some words, put out his hand to seize the prince, then
fell in two and surrendered his life.

There was water close at hand, and the prince made his ablution,
and then said: 'O my heart! a wonderful task lies upon you.'  A
second negro came out of the fort, and seeing what had been done,
went back and told his chief.  Others wished to be doubled, and
went out, and of every one the Scorpion of Solomon made two. 
Then Taram-taq sent for a giant negro named Chil-maq, who in the
day of battle was worth three hundred, and said to him: 'I shall
thank you to fetch me that man.'

Chil-maq went out, tall as a tower, and bearing a shield of eight
millstones, and as he walked he shouted: 'Ho! blunder- head! by
what right do you come to our country and kill our people?  Come!
make two of me.'  As the prince was despicable in his eyes, he
tossed aside his club and rushed to grip him with his hands.  He
caught him by the collar, tucked him under his arm and set off
with him to Taram-taq.  But the prince drew the dagger of Timus
and thrust it upwards through the giant's armpit, for its full
length.  This made Chil-maq drop him and try to pick up his club;
but when he stooped the mighty sword shore him through at the
waist.

When news of his champion's death reached Taram-taq he put
himself at the head of an army of his negroes and led them forth. 
Many fell before the magic sword, and the prince laboured on in
spite of weakness and fatigue till he was almost worn out.  In a
moment of respite from attack he struck his fire-steel and burned
a hair of the king-lion; and he had just succeeded in this when
the negroes charged again and all but took him prisoner. 
Suddenly from behind the distant veil of the desert appeared an
army of lions led by their king.  'What brings these scourges of
heaven here?' cried the negroes.  They came roaring up, and put
fresh life into the prince.  He fought on, and when he struck on
a belt the wearer fell in two, and when on a head he cleft to the
waist.  Then the ten thousand mighty lions joined the fray and
tore in pieces man and horse.

Taram-taq was left alone; he would have retired into his fort,
but the prince shouted: 'Whither away, accursed one?  Are you
fleeing before me?' At these defiant words the chief shouted
back, 'Welcome, man! Come here and I will soften you to wax
beneath my club.'  Then he hurled his club at the prince's head,
but it fell harmless because the prince had quickly spurred his
horse forward.  The chief, believing he had hit him, was looking
down for him, when all at once he came up behind and cleft him to
the waist and sent him straight to hell.

The king-lion greatly praised the dashing courage of Prince
Almas.  They went together into the Castle of Clashing Swords and
found it adorned and fitted in princely fashion.  In it was a
daughter of Taram taq, still a child She sent a message to Prince
Almas saying, 'O king of the world! choose this slave to be your
handmaid.  Keep her with you; where you go, there she will go! '
He sent for her and she kissed his feet and received the
Mussulman faith at his hands.  He told her he was going a long
journey on important business, and that when he came back he
would take her and her possessions to his own country, but that
for the present she must stay in the castle.  Then he made over
the fort and all that was in it to the care of the lion, saying:
'Guard them, brother! let no one lay a hand on them.'  He said
goodbye, chose a fresh horse from the chief's stable and once
again took the road.

After travelling many stages and for many days, he reached a
plain of marvellous beauty and refreshment.  It was carpeted with
flowers--roses, tulips, and clover; it had lovely lawns, and
amongst them running water.  This choicest place of earth filled
him with wonder.  There was a tree such as he had never seen
before; its branches were alike, but it bore flowers and fruit of
a thousand kinds.  Near it a reservoir had been fashioned of four
sorts of stone--touchstone, pure stone, marble, and loadstone. 
In and out of it flowed water like attar.  The prince felt sure
this must be the place of the Simurgh.'  he dismounted, turned
his horse loose to graze, ate some of the food Jamila had given
him, drank of the stream and lay down to sleep.

He was still dozing when he was aroused by the neighing and
pawing of his horse.  When he could see clearly he made out a
mountain-like dragon whose heavy breast crushed the stones
beneath it into putty.  He remembered the Thousand Names of God
and took the bow of Salih from its case and three arrows from
their quiver.  He bound the dagger of Tlmus firmly to his waist
and hung the scorpion of Solomon round his neck.  Then he set an
arrow on the string and released it with such force that it went
in at the monster's eye right up to the notch.  The dragon
writhed on itself, and belched forth an evil vapour, and beat the
ground with its head till the earth quaked.  Then the prince took
a second arrow and shot into its throat.  It drew in its breath
and would have sucked the prince into its maw, but when he was
within striking distance he drew his sword and, having committed
himself to God, struck a mighty blow which cut the creature's
neck down to the gullet.  The foul vapour of the beast and horror
at its strangeness now overcame the prince, and he fainted.  When
he came to himself he found that he was drenched in the gore of
the dead monster.  He rose and thanked God for his deliverance.

The nest of the Simurgh was in the wonderful tree above him, and
in it were young birds; the parents were away searching for food. 
They always told the children, before they left them, not to put
their heads out of the nest; but, to-day, at the noise of the
fight below, they looked down and so saw the whole affair.  By
the time the dragon had been killed they were very hungry and set
up a clamour for food.  The prince therefore cut up the dragon
and fed them with it, bit by bit, till they had eaten the whole. 
He then washed himself and lay down to rest, and he was still
asleep when the Simurgh came home.  As a rule, the young birds
raised a clamour of welcome when their parents came near, but on
this day they were so full of dragon-meat that they had no
choice, they had to go to sleep.

As they flew nearer, the old birds saw the prince lying under the
tree and no sign of life in the nest.  They thought that the
misfortune which for so many earlier years had befallen them had
again happened and that their nestlings had disappeared.  They
had never been able to find out the murderer, and now suspected
the prince.  ' He has eaten our children and sleeps after it; he
must die,' said the father-bird, and flew back to the hills and
clawed up a huge stone which he meant to let fall on the prince's
head.  But his mate said, 'Let us look into the nest first for to
kill an innocent person would condemn us at the Day of
Resurrection.'  They flew nearer, and presently the young birds
woke and cried, 'Mother, what have you brought for us?' and they
told the whole story of the fight, and of how they were alive
only by the favour of the young man under the tree, and of his
cutting up the dragon and of their eating it.  The mother-bird
then remarked, 'Truly, father! you were about to do a strange
thing, and a terrible sin has been averted from you.'  Then the
Simurgh flew off to a distance with the great stone and dropped
it.  It sank down to the very middle of the earth.

Coming back, the Simurgh saw that a little sunshine fell upon the
prince through the leaves, and it spread its wings and shaded him
till he woke.  When he got up he salaamed to it, who returned his
greeting with joy and gratitude, and caressed him and said: 'O
youth, tell me true! who are you, and where are you going?  And
how did you cross that pitiless desert where never yet foot of
man had trod?' The prince told his story from beginning to end,
and finished by saying: 'Now it is my heart's wish that you
should help me to get to Waq of the Caucasus.  Perhaps, by your
favour, I shall accomplish my task and avenge my brothers.'  In
reply the Simurgh.'  first blessed the deliverer of his children,
and then went on: ' What you have done no child of man has ever
done before; you assuredly have a claim on all my help, for every
year up till now that dragon has come here and has destroyed my
nestlings, and I have never been able to find who was the
murderer and to avenge myself.  By God's grace you have removed
my children's powerful foe.  I regard you as a child of my own. 
Stay with me; I will give you everything you desire, and I will
establish a city here for you, and will furnish it with every
requisite; I will give you the land of the Caucasus, and will
make its princes subject to you.  Give up the journey to Waq, it
is full of risk, and the jins there will certainly kill you.' 
But nothing could move the prince, and seeing this the bird went
on: 'Well, so be it! When you wish to set forth you must go into
the plain and take seven head of deer, and must make water-tight
bags of their hides and keep their flesh in seven portions. 
Seven seas lie on our way-- I will carry you over them; but if I
have not food and drink we shall fall into the sea and be
drowned.  When I ask for it you must put food and water into my
mouth.  So we shall make the journey safely.'

The prince did all as he was told, then they took flight; they
crossed the seven seas, and at each one the prince fed the
Simurgh When they alighted on the shore of the last sea, it said:
'O my son! there lies your road; follow it to the city.  Take
thee three feathers of mine, and, if you are in a difficulty,
burn one and I will be with you in the twinkling of an eye.'

The prince walked on in solitude till he reached the city.  He
went in and wandered about through all quarters, and through
bazaars and lanes and squares, in the least knowing from whom he
could ask information about the riddle of Mihr-afruz.  He spent
seven days thinking it over in silence.  From the first day of
his coming he had made friends with a young cloth-merchant, and a
great liking had sprung up between them.  One day he said
abruptly to his companion: 'O dear friend! I wish you would tell
me what the rose did to the cypress, and what the sense of the
riddle is.'  The merchant started, and exclaimed: 'If there were
not brotherly affection between us, I would cut off your head for
asking me this! ' 'If you meant to kill me,' retorted the prince,
' you would still have first to tell me what I want to know.' 
When the merchant saw that the prince was in deadly earnest, he
said: ' If you wish to hear the truth of the matter you must wait
upon our king.  There is no other way; no one else will tell you. 
I have a well-wisher at the Court, named Farrukh-fal,[FN#12] and
will introduce you to him.'  'That would be excellent,' cried the
prince.  A meeting was arranged between Farrukhfal and Almas, and
then the amir took him to the king's presence and introduced him
as a stranger and traveller who had come from afar to sit in the
shadow of King Sinaubar.

Now the Simurgh had given the prince a diamond weighing thirty
misqals, and he ordered this to the king, who at once recognised
its value, and asked where it had been obtained.  'I, your slave,
once had riches and state and power; there are many such stones
in my country.  On my way here I was plundered at the Castle of
Clashing Swords, and I saved this one thing only, hidden in my
bathing-cloth.'  In return for the diamond, King Sinaubar
showered gifts of much greater value, for he remembered that it
was the last possession of the prince.  He showed the utmost
kindness and hospitality, and gave his wazir orders to instal the
prince in the royal guest-house.  He took much pleasure in his
visitor's society; they were together every day and spent the
time most pleasantly.  Several times the king said: 'Ask me for
something, that I may give it you.'One day he so pressed to know
what would pleasure the prince, that the latter said: 'I have
only one wish, and that I will name to you in private.'  The king
at once commanded every one to withdraw, and then Prince Almas
said: ' The desire of my life is to know what the rose did to the
cypress, and what meaning there is in the words.'  The king was
astounded.  'In God's name! if anyone else had said that to me I
should have cut off his head instantly.'  The prince heard this
in silence, and presently so beguiled the king with pleasant talk
that to kill him was impossible.

Time flew by, the king again and again begged the prince to ask
some gift of him, and always received this same reply: 'I wish
for your Majesty's welfare, what more can I desire?'One night
there was a banquet, and cupbearers carried round gold and silver
cups of sparkling wine, and singers with sweetest voices
contended for the prize.  The prince drank from the king's own
cup, and when his head was hot with wine he took a lute from one
of the musicians and placed himself on the carpet border and sang
and sang till he witched away the sense of all who listened. 
Applause and compliments rang from every side.  The king filled
his cup and called the prince and gave it him and said: 'Name
your wish! it is yours.'  The prince drained off the wine and
answered: 'O king of the world! learn and know that I have only
one aim in life, and this is to know what the rose did to the
cypress.'

'Never yet,' replied the king, 'has any man come out from that
question alive.  If this is your only wish, so be it; I will tell
you.  But I will do this on one condition only, namely, that when
you have heard you will submit yourself to death.'  To this the
prince agreed, and said: ' I set my foot firmly on this compact.'

The king then gave an order to an attendant; a costly carpet
overlaid with European velvet was placed near him, and a dog was
led in by a golden and jewelled chain and set upon the splendid
stuffs.  A band of fair girls came in and stood round it in
waiting.

Then, with ill words, twelve negroes dragged in a lovely woman,
fettered on hands and feet and meanly dressed, and they set her
down on the bare floor.  She was extraordinarily beautiful, and
shamed the glorious sun.  The king ordered a hundred stripes to
be laid on her tender body; she sighed a long sigh.  Food was
called for and table-cloths were spread.  Delicate meats were set
before the dog, and water given it in a royal cup of Chinese
crystal.  When it had eaten its fill, its leavings were placed
before the lovely woman and she was made to eat of them.  She
wept and her tears were pearls; she smiled and her lips shed
roses.  Pearls and flowers were gathered up and taken to the
treasury.

'Now,' said the king, ' you have seen these things and your
purpose is fulfilled.'  'Truly,' said the prince, 'I have seen
things which I have not understood; what do they mean, and what
is the story of them?  Tell me and kill me.'

Then said the king: 'The woman you see there in chains is my
wife; she is called Gul, the Rose, and I am Sinaubar, the
Cypress.  One day I was hunting and became very thirsty.  After
great search I discovered a well in a place so secret that
neither bird nor beast nor man could find it without labour.  I
was alone, I took my turban for a rope and my cap for a bucket. 
There was a good deal of water, but when I let down my rope,
something caught it, and I could not in any way draw it back.  I
shouted down into the well: "O! servant of God! whoever you are,
why do you deal unfairly with me?  I am dying of thirst, let go!
in God's name." A cry came up in answer, "O servant of God! we
have been in the well a long time; in God's name get us out!"
After trying a thousand schemes, I drew up two blind women.  They
said they were peris, and that their king had blinded them in his
anger and had left them in the well alone.

' "Now," they said, "if you will get us the cure for our
blindness we will devote ourselves to your service, and will do
whatever you wish."

' "What is the cure for your blindness?"

' "Not far from this place," they said, "a cow comes up from the
great sea to graze; a little of her dung would cure us.  We
should be eternally your debtors.  Do not let the cow see you, or
she will assuredly kill you."

'With renewed strength and spirit I went to the shore.  There I
watched the cow come up from the sea, graze, and go back.  Then I
came out of my hiding, took a little of her dung and conveyed it
to the peris.  They rubbed it on their eyes, and by the Divine
might saw again.

'They thanked heaven and me, and then considered what they could
do to show their gratitude to me.  "Our peri-king," they said,
"has a daughter whom he keeps under his own eye and thinks the
most lovely girl on earth.  In good sooth, she has not her equal!
Now we will get you into her house and you must win her heart,
and if she has an inclination for another, you must drive it out
and win her for yourself.  Her mother loves her so dearly that
she has no ease but in her presence, and she will give her to no
one in marriage.  Teach her to love you so that she cannot exist
without you.  But if the matter becomes known to her mother she
will have you burned in the fire.  Then you must beg, as a last
favour, that your body may be anointed with oil so that you may
burn the more quickly and be spared torture.  If the peri-king
allows this favour, we two will manage to be your anointers, and
we will put an oil on you such that if you were a thousand years
in the fire not a trace of burning would remain."

'In the end the two peris.  took me to the girl's house.  I saw
her sleeping daintily.  She was most lovely, and I was so amazed
at the perfection of her beauty that I stood with senses lost,
and did not know if she were real or a dream.  When at last I saw
that she was a real girl, I returned thanks that I, the runner,
had come to my goal, and that I, the seeker, had found my
treasure.

'When the peri opened her eyes she asked in affright: "Who are
you?  Have you come to steal?  How did you get here?  Be quick!
save yourself from this whirlpool of destruction, for the demons
and peris.  who guard me will wake and seize you."

'But love's arrow had struck me deep, and the girl, too, looked
kindly on me.  I could not go away.  For some months I remained
hidden in her house.  'We did not dare to let her mother know of
our love.  Sometimes the girl was very sad and fearful lest her
mother should come to know.  One day her father said to her:
"Sweetheart, for some time I have noticed that your beauty is not
what it was.  How is this?  Has sickness touched you?  Tell me
that I may seek a cure." Alas! there was now no way of concealing
the mingled delight and anguish of our love; from secret it
became known.  I was put in prison and the world grew dark to my
rose, bereft of her lover.

'The peri-king ordered me to be burnt, and said: "Why have you, a
man, done this perfidious thing in my house?" His demons and
peris.  collected amber-wood and made a pile, and would have set
me on it, when I remembered the word of life which the two peris. 
I had rescued had breathed into my ear, and I asked that my body
might be rubbed with oil to release me the sooner from torture. 
This was allowed, and those two contrived to be the anointers.  I
was put into the fire and it was kept up for seven days and
nights.  By the will of the Great King it left no trace upon me. 
At the end of a week the pert-king ordered the ashes to be cast
upon the dust-heap, and I was found alive and unharmed.

'Peris who had seen Gul consumed by her love for me now
interceded with the king, and said: "It is clear that your
daughter's fortunes are bound up with his, for the fire has not
hurt him.  It is best to give him the girl, for they love one
another.  He is King of Waq of Qaf, and you will find none
better."

'To this the king agreed, and made formal marriage between Gul
and me.  You now know the price I paid for this faithless
creature.  O prince! remember our compact.'

'I remember,' said the prince; ' but tell me what brought Queen
Gul to her present pass?'

'One night,' continued King Sinaubar,'I was aroused by feeling
Gul's hands and feet, deadly cold, against my body.  I asked her
where she had been to get so cold, and she said she had had to go
out.  Next morning, when I went to my stable I saw that two of my
horses, Windfoot and Tiger, were thin and worn out.  I
reprimanded the groom and beat him.  He asked where his fault
lay, and said that every night my wife took one or other of these
horses and rode away, and came back only just before dawn.  A
flame kindled in my heart, and I asked myself where she could go
and what she could do.  I told the groom to be silent, and when
next Gul took a horse from the stable to saddle another quickly
and bring it to me.  That day I did not hunt, but stayed at home
to follow the matter up.  I lay down as usual at night and
pretended to fall asleep.  When I seemed safely off Gul got up
and went to the stable as her custom was.  That night it was
Tiger's turn.  She rode off on him, and I took Windfoot and
followed.  With me went that dog you see, a faithful friend who
never left me.

'When I came to the foot of those hills which lie outside the
city I saw Gul dismount and go towards a house which some negroes
have built there.  Over against the door was a high seat, and on
it lay a giant negro, before whom she salaamed.  He got up and
beat her till she was marked with weals, but she uttered no
complaint.  I was dumfounded, for once when I had struck her with
a rose stalk she had complained and fretted for three days! Then
the negro said to her: " How now, ugly one and shaven head! Why
are you so late, and why are you not wearing wedding garments?"
She answered him: "That person did not go to sleep quickly, and
he stayed at home all day, so that I was not able to adorn
myself.  I came as soon as I could." In a little while he called
her to sit beside him; but this was more than I could bear.  I
lost control of myself and rushed upon him.  He clutched my
collar and we grappled in a death struggle.  Suddenly she came
behind me, caught my feet and threw me.  While he held me on the
ground, she drew out my own knife and gave it to him.  I should
have been killed but for that faithful dog which seized his
throat and pulled him down and pinned him to the ground.  Then I
got up and despatched the wretch.  There were four other negroes
at the place; three I killed and the fourth got away, and has
taken refuge beneath the throne of Mihr-afruz, daughter of King
Quimus.  I took Gul back to my palace, and from that time till
now I have treated her as a dog is treated, and I have cared for
my dog as though it were my wife.  Now you know what the rose did
to the cypress; and now you must keep compact with me.'

'I shall keep my word,' said the prince; 'but may a little water
be taken to the roof so that I may make my last ablution?'

To this request the king consented.  The prince mounted to the
roof, and, getting into a corner, struck his fire-steel and
burned one of the Sirurgh's feathers in the flame.  Straightway
it appeared, and by the majesty of its presence made the city
quake.  It took the prince on its back and soared away to the
zenith.

After a time King Sinaubar said: 'That young man is a long time
on the roof; go and bring him here.'  But there was no sign of
the prince upon the roof; only, far away in the sky, the Simurgh
was seen carrying him off.  When the king heard of his escape he
thanked heaven that his hands were clean of this blood.

Up and up flew the Simurgh, till earth looked like an egg resting
on an ocean.  At length it dropped straight down to its own
place, where the kind prince was welcomed by the young birds and
most hospitably entertained.  He told the whole story of the rose
and the cypress, and then, laden with gifts which the Simurgh had
gathered from cities far and near, he set his face for the Castle
of Clashing Swords.  The king-lion came out to meet him; he took
the negro chief's daughter---whose name was also Gul--in lawful
marriage, and then marched with her and her possessions and her
attendants to the Place of Gifts.  Here they halted for a night,
and at dawn said good-bye to the king-lion and set out for
Jamila's country.

When the Lady Jamila heard that Prince Almas was near, she went
out, with many a fair handmaid, to give him loving reception. 
Their meeting was joyful, and they went together to the
garden-palace.  Jamila summoned all her notables, and in their
presence her marriage with the prince was solemnised.  A few days
later she entrusted her affairs to her wazir, and made
preparation to go with the prince to his own country.  Before she
started she restored all the men whom her sister, Latifa, had
bewitched, to their own forms, and received their blessings, and
set them forward to their homes.  The wicked Latifa herself she
left quite alone in her garden-house.  When all was ready they
set out with all her servants and slaves, all her treasure and
goods, and journeyed at ease to the city of King Quimus.

When King Quimus heard of the approach of such a great company,
he sent out his wazir to give the prince honourable meeting, and
to ask what had procured him the favour of the visit.  The prince
sent back word that he had no thought of war, but he wrote: '
Learn and know, King Quimus, that I am here to end the crimes of
your insolent daughter who has tyrannously done to death many
kings and kings sons, and has hung their heads on your citadel. 
I am here to give her the answer to her riddle.'  Later on he
entered the city, beat boldly on the drums, and was conducted to
the presence.

The king entreated him to have nothing to do with the riddle, for
that no man had come out of it alive.  'O king!' replied the
prince, 'it is to answer it that I am here; I will not withdraw.'

Mihr-afruz was told that one man more had staked his head on her
question, and that this was one who said he knew the answer.  At
the request of the prince, all the officers and notables of the
land were summoned to hear his reply to the princess.  All
assembled, and the king and his queen Gul-rakh, and the girl and
the prince were there.

The prince addressed Mihr-afruz: 'What is the question you ask?'

'What did the rose do to the cypress?' she rejoined.

The prince smiled, and turned and addressed the assembly.

'You who are experienced men and versed in affairs, did you ever
know or hear and see anything of this matter?'

'No!' they answered, 'no one has ever known or heard or seen
aught about it; it is an empty fancy.'

'From whom, then, did the princess hear of it?  This empty fancy
it is that has done many a servant of God to death!'

All saw the good sense of his words and showed their approval. 
Then he turned to the princess: 'Tell us the truth, princess; who
told you of this thing?  I know it hair by hair, and in and out;
but if I tell you what I know, who is there that can say I speak
the truth?  You must produce the person who can confirm my
words.'

Her heart sank, for she feared that her long-kept secret was now
to be noised abroad.  But she said merely: 'Explain yourself.'

'I shall explain myself fully when you bring here the negro whom
you hide beneath your throne.'

Here the king shouted in wonderment: 'Explain yourself, young
man! What negro does my daughter hide beneath her throne?'

'That,' said the prince, 'you will see if you order to be brought
here the negro who will be found beneath the throne of the
princess.'

Messengers were forthwith despatched to the garden house, and
after awhile they returned bringing a negro whom they had
discovered in a secret chamber underneath the throne of
Mihr-afruz, dressed in a dress of honour, and surrounded with
luxury.  The king was overwhelmed with astonishment, but the girl
had taken heart again.  She had had time to think that perhaps
the prince had heard of the presence of the negro, and knew no
more.  So she said haughtily: 'Prince!  you have not answered my
riddle.'

'O most amazingly impudent person,' cried he, 'do you not yet
repent?'

Then he turned to the people, and told them the whole story of
the rose and the cypress, of King Sinaubar and Queen Gul.  When
he came to the killing of the negroes, he said to the one who
stood before them: 'You, too, were present.'

'That is so; all happened as you have told it!'

There was great rejoicing in the court and all through the
country over the solving of the riddle, and because now no more
kings and princes would be killed.  King Quimus made over his
daughter to Prince Almas, but the latter refused to marry her,
and took her as his captive.  He then asked that the heads should
be removed from the battlements and given decent burial.  This
was done.  He received from the king everything that belonged to
Mihr-afruz; her treasure of gold and silver; her costly stuffs
and carpets; her household plenishing; her horses and camels; her
servants and slaves.

Then he returned to his camp and sent for Dil-aram, who came
bringing her goods and chattels, her gold and her jewels.  When
all was ready, Prince Almas set out for home, taking with him
Jamila, and Dil-aram and Gul, daughter of Taram-taq, and the
wicked Mihr-afruz, and all the belongings of the four, packed on
horses and camels, and in carts without number.

As he approached the borders of his father's country word of his
coming went before him, and all the city came forth to give him
welcome.  King Saman-lal-posh-- Jessamine, wearer of rubies--had
so bewept the loss of his sons that he was now blind.  When the
prince had kissed his feet and received his blessing, he took
from a casket a little collyrium of Solomon, which the Simurgh
had given him, and which reveals the hidden things of earth, and
rubbed it on his father's eyes.  Light came, and the king saw his
son.

Mihr-afruz was brought before the king, and the prince said:
'This is the murderer of your sons; do with her as you will.' 
The king fancied that the prince might care for the girl's
beauty, and replied: 'You have humbled her; do with her as you
will.'

Upon this the prince sent for four swift and strong horses, and
had the negro bound to each one of them; then each was driven to
one of the four quarters, and he tore in pieces like muslin.

This frightened Mihr-afruz horribly, for she thought the same
thing might be done to herself.  She cried out to the prince: 'O
Prince Almas! what is hardest to get is most valued.  Up till now
I have been subject to no man, and no man had had my love.  The
many kings and kings sons who have died at my hands have died
because it was their fate to die like this.  In this matter I
have not sinned.  That was their fate from eternity; and from the
beginning it was predestined that my fate should be bound up with
yours.'

The prince gave ear to the argument from pre-ordainment, and as
she was a very lovely maiden he took her too in lawful marriage. 
She and Jamila, set up house together, and Dil-aram and Gul set
up theirs; and the prince passed the rest of his life with the
four in perfect happiness, and in pleasant and sociable
entertainment.

Now has been told what the rose did to the cypress.

Finished, finished, finished!


Footnotes for What The Rose Did to the Cypress


[FN#1]   Translated from two Persian MSS.  in the possession of
the British Museum and the India Office, and adapted, with some
reservations, by Annette S.  Beveridge.

[FN#2]   Jessamine, ruby-decked.

[FN#3]   Life-giving diamond.

[FN#4]   World-gripper.

[FN#5]   Love-enkindler.

[FN#6]   Rose-cheek.

[FN#7]   Heartsease.

[FN#8]   Elias.

[FN#9]   Pleasure.

[FN#10]  Thirty-birds.

[FN#11]  Pomp and Pride.

[FN#12]  Of happy omen.




Ball-carrier and the Bad One



Far, far in the forest there were two little huts, and in each of
them lived a man who was a famous hunter, his wife, and three or
four children.  Now the children were forbidden to play more than
a short distance from the door, as it was known that, away on the
other side of the wood near the great river, there dwelt a witch
who had a magic ball that she used as a means of stealing
children.

Her plan was a very simple one, and had never yet failed.  When
she wanted a child she just flung her ball in the direction of
the child's home, and however far off it might be, the ball was
sure to reach it.  Then, as soon as the child saw it, the ball
would begin rolling slowly back to the witch, just keeping a
little ahead of the child, so that he always thought that he
could catch it the next minute.  But he never did, and, what was
more, his parents never saw him again.

Of course you must not suppose that all the fathers and mothers
who had lost children made no attempts to find them, but the
forest was so large, and the witch was so cunning in knowing
exactly where they were going to search, that it was very easy
for her to keep out of the way.  Besides, there was always the
chance that the children might have been eaten by wolves, of
which large herds roamed about in winter.

One day the old witch happened to want a little boy, so she threw
her ball in the direction of the hunters' huts.  A child was
standing outside, shooting at a mark with his bow and arrows, but
the moment he saw the ball, which was made of glass whose blues
and greens and whites, all frosted over, kept changing one into
the other, he flung down his bow, and stooped to pick the ball
up.  But as he did so it began to roll very gently downhill.  The
boy could not let it roll away, when it was so close to him, so
he gave chase.  The ball seemed always within his grasp, yet he
could never catch it; it went quicker and quicker, and the boy
grew more and more excited.  That time he almost touched it--no,
he missed it by a hair's breadth! Now, surely, if he gave a
spring he could get in front of it! He sprang forward, tripped
and fell, and found himself in the witch's house!

'Welcome! welcome! grandson!' said she; 'get up and rest
yourself, for you have had a long walk, and I am sure you must be
tired!' So the boy sat down, and ate some food which she gave him
in a bowl.  It was quite different from anything he had tasted
before, and he thought it was delicious.  When he had eaten up
every bit, the witch asked him if he had ever fasted.

'No,' replied the boy, 'at least I have been obliged to
sometimes, but never if there was any food to be had.'

'You will have to fast if you want the spirits to make you strong
and wise, and the sooner you begin the better.'

'Very well,' said the boy, 'what do I do first?'

'Lie down on those buffalo skins by the door of the hut,'
answered she; and the boy lay down, and the squirrels and little
bears and the birds came and talked to him.

At the end of ten days the old woman came to him with a bowl of
the same food that he had eaten before.

'Get up, my grandson, you have fasted long enough.  Have the good
spirits visited you, and granted you the strength and wisdom that
you desire?'

'Some of them have come, and have given me a portion of both,'
answered the boy, 'but many have stayed away from me.'

'Then,' said she, 'you must fast ten days more.'

So the boy lay down again on the buffalo skins, and fasted for
ten days, and at the end of that time he turned his face to the
wall, and fasted for twenty days longer.  At length the witch
called to him, and said:

'Come and eat something, my grandson.'  At the sound of her voice
the boy got up and ate the food she gave him.  When he had
finished every scrap she spoke as before: 'Tell me, my grandson,
have not the good spirits visited you all these many days that
you have fasted?'

'Not all, grandmother,' answered he; 'there are still some who
keep away from me and say that I have not fasted long enough.'

'Then you must fast again,' replied the old woman, 'and go on
fasting till you receive the gifts of all the good spirits.  Not
one must be missing.'

The boy said nothing, but lay down for the third time on the
buffalo skins, and fasted for twenty days more.  And at the end
of that time the witch thought he was dead, his face was so white
and his body so still.  But when she had fed him out of the bowl
he grew stronger, and soon was able to sit up.

'You have fasted a long time,' said she, 'longer than anyone ever
fasted before.  Surely the good spirits must be satisfied now?'

'Yes, grandmother,' answered the boy, 'they have all come, and
have given me their gifts.'

This pleased the old woman so much that she brought him another
basin of food, and while he was eating it she talked to him, and
this is what she said: 'Far away, on the other side of the great
river, is the home of the Bad One.  In his house is much gold,
and what is more precious even than the gold, a little bridge,
which lengthens out when the Bad One waves his hand, so that
there is no river or sea that he cannot cross.  Now I want that
bridge and some of the gold for myself, and that is the reason
that I have stolen so many boys by means of my ball.  I have
tried to teach them how to gain the gifts of the good spirits,
but none of them would fast long enough, and at last I had to
send them away to perform simple, easy little tasks.  But you
have been strong and faithful, and you can do this thing if you
listen to what I tell you! When you reach the river tie this ball
to your foot, and it will take you across--you cannot manage it
in any other way.  But do not be afraid; trust to the ball, and
you will be quite safe!'

The boy took the ball and put it in a bag.  Then he made himself
a club and a bow, and some arrows which would fly further than
anyone else's arrows, because of the strength the good spirits
had given him.  They had also bestowed on him the power of
changing his shape, and had increased the quickness of his eyes
and ears so that nothing escaped him.  And in some way or other
they made him understand that if he needed more help they would
give it to him.

When all these things were ready the boy bade farewell to the
witch and set out.  He walked through the forest for several days
without seeing anyone but his friends the squirrels and the bears
and the birds, but though he stopped and spoke to them all, he
was careful not to let them know where he was going.

At last, after many days, he came to the river, and beyond it he
noticed a small hut standing on a hill which he guessed to be the
home of the Bad One.  But the stream flowed so quickly that he
could not see how he was ever to cross it, and in order to test
how swift the current really was, he broke a branch from a tree
and threw it in.  It seemed hardly to touch the water before it
was carried away, and even his magic sight could not follow it. 
He could not help feeling frightened, but he hated giving up
anything that he had once undertaken, and, fastening the ball on
his right foot, he ventured on the river.  To his surprise he was
able to stand up; then a panic seized him, and he scrambled up
the bank again.  In a minute or two he plucked up courage to go a
little further into the river, but again its width frightened
him, and a second time he turned back.  However, he felt rather
ashamed of his cowardice, as it was quite clear that his ball
could support him, and on his third trial he got safely to the
other side.

Once there he replaced the ball in the bag, and looked carefully
round him.  The door of the Bad One's hut was open, and he saw
that the ceiling was supported by great wooden beams, from which
hung the bags of gold and the little bridge.  He saw, too, the
Bad One sitting in the midst of his treasures eating his dinner,
and drinking something out of a horn.  It was plain to the boy
that he must invent some plan of getting the Bad One out of the
way, or else he would never be able to steal the gold or the
bridge.

What should he do?  Give horrible shrieks as if he were in pain? 
But the Bad One would not care whether he were murdered or not!
Call him by his name?  But the Bad One was very cunning, and
would suspect some trick.  He must try something better than
that! Then suddenly an idea came to him, and he gave a little
jump of joy.  'Oh, how stupid of me not to think of that before!'
said he, and he wished with all his might that the Bad One should
become very hungry--so hungry that he could not wait a moment for
fresh food to be brought to him.  And sure enough at that instant
the Bad One called out to his servant, 'You did not bring food
that would satisfy a sparrow Fetch some more at once, for I am
perfectly starving.'  Then, without giving the woman time to go
to the larder, he got up from his chair, and rolled, staggering
from hunger, towards the kitchen.

Directly the door had closed on the Bad One the boy ran in,
pulled down a bag of gold from the beam, and tucked it under his
left arm.  Next he unhooked the little bridge and put it under
his right.  He did not try to escape, as most boys of his age
would have done, for the wisdom put into his mind by the good
spirits taught him that before he could reach the river and make
use of the bridge the Bad One would have tracked him by his
footsteps and been upon him.  So, making himself very small and
thin, he hid himself behind a pile of buffalo skins in the
corner, first tearing a slit through one of them, so that he
could see what was going on.

He had hardly settled himself when the servant entered the room,
and, as she did so, the last bag of gold on the beam fell to the
ground--for they had begun to fall directly the boy had taken the
first one.  She cried to her master that someone had stolen both
the bag and the bridge, and the Bad One rushed in, mad with
anger, and bade her go and seek for footsteps outside, that they
might find out where the thief had gone.  In a few minutes she
returned, saying that he must be in the house, as she could not
see any footsteps leading to the river, and began to move all the
furniture in the room, without discovering Ball Carrier.

'But he must be here somewhere,' she said to herself, examining
for the second time the pile of buffalo skins; and Ball-Carrier,
knowing that he could not possibly escape now, hastily wished
that the Bad One should be unable to eat any more food at
present.

'Ah, there is a slit in this one,' cried the servant, shaking the
skin; 'and here he is.'  And she pulled out Ball-Carrier, looking
so lean and small that he would hardly have made a mouthful for a
sparrow.

'Was it you who took my gold and bridge?' asked the Bad One.

'Yes,' answered Ball-Carrier, 'it was I who took them.'

The Bad One made a sign to the woman, who inquired where he had
hidden them.  He lifted his left arm where the gold was, and she
picked up a knife and scraped his skin so that no gold should be
left sticking to it.

'What have you done with the bridge?' said she.  And he lifted
his right arm, from which she took the bridge, while the Bad One
looked on, well pleased.  'Be sure that he does not run away,'
chuckled he.  'Boil some water, and get him ready for cooking,
while I go and invite my friends the water-demons to the feast.'

The woman seized Ball-Carrier between her finger and thumb, and
was going to carry him to the kitchen, when the boy spoke:

'I am very lean and small now,' he said, 'hardly worth the
trouble of cooking; but if you were to keep me two days, and gave
me plenty of food, I should get big and fat.  As it is, your
friends the water-demons would think you meant to laugh at them,
when they found that I was the feast.'

'Well, perhaps you are right,' answered the Bad One; 'I will keep
you for two days.'  And he went out to visit the water-demons.

Meanwhile the servant, whose name was Lung Woman, led him into a
little shed, and chained him up to a ring in the wall.  But food
was given him every hour, and at the end of two days he was as
fat and big as a Christmas turkey, and could hardly move his head
from one side to the other.

'He will do now,' said the Bad One, who came constantly to see
how he was getting on.  'I shall go and tell the water-demons
that we expect them to dinner to-night.  Put the kettle on the
fire, but be sure on no account to taste the broth.'

Lung-Woman lost no time in obeying her orders.  She built up the
fire, which had got very low, filled the kettle with water, and
passing a rope which hung from the ceiling through the handle,
swung it over the flames.  Then she brought in Ball-Carrier, who,
seeing all these preparations, wished that as long as he was in
the kettle the water might not really boil, though it would hiss
and bubble, and also, that the spirits would turn the water into
fat.

The kettle soon began to sing and bubble, and Ball Carrier was
lifted in.  Very soon the fat which was to make the sauce rose to
the surface, and Ball-Carrier, who was bobbing about from one
side to the other, called out that Lung-Woman had better taste
the broth, as he though that some salt should be added to it. 
The servant knew quite well that her master had forbidden her to
do any thing of the kind, but when once the idea was put into her
head, she found the smell from the kettle so delicious that she
unhooked a long ladle from the wall and plunged it into the
kettle.

'You will spill it all, if you.  stand so far off,' said the boy;
' why don't you come a little nearer?' And as she did so he cried
to the spirits to give him back his usual size and strength and
to make the water scalding hot Then he gave the kettle a kick,
which upset all the boiling water upon her, and jumping over her
body he seized once more the gold and the bridge, picked up his
club and bow and arrows, and after setting fire to the Bad One's
hut, ran down to the river, which he crossed safely by the help
of the bridge.

The hut, which was made of wood, was burned to the ground before
the Bad One came back with a large crowd of water-demons.  There
was not a sign of anyone or anything, so he started for the
river, where he saw Ball Carrier sitting quietly on the other
side.  Then the Bad One knew what had happened, and after telling
the water demons that there would be no feast after all, he
called to Ball-Carrier, who was eating an a,pple.

'I know your name now,' he said, 'and as you have ruined me, and
I am not rich any more, will you take me as your servant?'

'Yes, I will, though you have tried to kill me,' answered
Ball-Carrier, throwing the bridge across the water as he spoke. 
But when the Bad One was in the midst of the stream, the boy
wished it to become small; and the Bad One fell into the water
and was drowned, and the world was rid of him.

[U.S..  Bureau of Ethnology.]





How Ball-carrier Finished His Task



After Ball-Carrier had managed to drown the Bad One so that he
could not do any more mischief, he forgot the way to his
grandmother's house, and could not find it again, though he
searched everywhere.  During this time he wandered into many
strange places, and had many adventures; and one day he came to a
hut where a young girl lived.  He was tired and hungry and begged
her to let him in and rest, and he stayed a long while, and the
girl became his wife.  One morning he saw two children playing in
front of the hut, and went out to speak to them.  But as soon as
they saw him they set up cries of horror and ran away.  'They are
the children of my sister who has been on a long journey,'
replied his wife, 'and now that she knows you are my husband she
wants to kill you.'

'Oh, well, let her try,' replied Ball-Carrier.  'It is not the
first time people have wished to do that.  And here I am still,
you see!'

'Be careful,' said the wife, ' she is very cunning.'  But at this
moment the sister-in-law came up.

'How do you do, brother-in-law?  I have heard of you so often
that I am very glad to meet you.  I am told that you are more
powerful than any man on earth, and as I am powerful too, let us
try which is the strongest.'

'That will be delightful,' answered he.  'Suppose we begin with a
short race, and then we will go on to other things.'

' That will suit me very well,' replied the woman, who was a
witch.  'And let us agree that the one who wins shall have the
right to kill the other.'

'Oh, certainly,' said Ball-Carrier;' and I don't think we shall
find a flatter course than the prairie itself--no one knows how
many miles it stretches.  We will run to the end and back again.'

This being settled they both made ready for the race, and
Ball-Carrier silently begged the good spirits to help him, and
not to let him fall into the hands of this wicked witch.

'When the sun touches the trunk of that tree we will start,' said
she, as they both stood side by side.  But with the first step
Ball-Carrier changed himself into a wolf and for a long way kept
ahead.  Then gradually he heard her creeping up behind him, and
soon she was in front.  So Ball-Carrier took the shape of a
pigeon and flew rapidly past her, but in a little while she was
in front again and the end of the prairie was in sight.  'A crow
can fly faster than a pigeon,' thought he, and as a crow he
managed to pass her and held his ground so long that he fancied
she was quite beaten.  The witch began to be afraid of it too,
and putting out all her strength slipped past him.  Next he put
on the shape of a hawk, and in this form he reached the bounds of
the prairie, he and the witch turning homewards at the moment.

Bird after bird he tried, but every time the witch gained on him
and took the lead.  At length the goal was in sight, and
Ball-Carrier knew that unless he could get ahead now he would be
killed before his own door, under the eyes of his wife.  His eyes
had grown dim from fatigue, his wings flapped wearily and hardly
bore him along, while the witch seemed as fresh as ever.  What
bird was there whose flight was swifter than his?  Would not the
good spirits tell him?  Ah, of course he knew; why had he not
thought of it at first and spared himself all that fatigue?  And
the next instant a humming bird, dressed in green and blue,
flashed past the woman and entered the house.  The witch came
panting up, furious at having lost the race which she felt
certain of winning; and Ball-Carrier, who had by this time
changed back into his own shape, struck her on the head and
killed her.

For a long while Ball-Carrier was content to stay quietly at home
with his wife and children, for he was tired of adventures, and
only did enough hunting to supply the house with food.  But one
day he happened to eat some poisonous berries that he had found
in the forest, and grew so ill that he felt he was going to die.

'When I am dead do not bury me in the earth,' he said, 'but put
me over there, among that clump of trees.'  So his wife and her
three children watched by him as long as he was alive, and after
he was dead they took him up and laid the body on a platform of
stakes which they had prepared in the grove.  And as they
returned weeping to the hut they caught a glimpse of the ball
rolling away down the path back to the old grandmother.  One of
the sons sprang forward to stop it, for Ball-Carrier had often
told them the tale of how it had helped him to cross the river,
but it was too quick for him, and they had to content themselves
with the war club and bow and arrows, which were put carefully
away.

By-and-by some travellers came past, and the chief among them
asked leave to marry Ball-Carrier's daughter.  The mother said
she must have a little time to think over it, as her daughter was
still very young; so it was settled that the man should go away
for a month with his friends, and then come back to see if the
girl was willing.

Now ever since Ball-Carrier's death the family had been very
poor, and often could not get enough to eat.  One morning the
girl, who had had no supper and no breakfast, wandered off to
look for cranberries, and though she was quite near home was
astonished at noticing a large hut, which certainly had not been
there when last she had come that way.  No one was about, so she
ventured to peep in, and her surprise was increased at seeing,
heaped up in one corner, a quantity of food of all sorts, while a
little robin redbreast stood perched on a beam looking down upon
her.

'It is my father, I am sure,' she cried; and the bird piped in
answer.

From that day, whenever they wanted food they went to the hut,
and though the robin could not speak, he would hop on their
shoulders and let them feed him with the food they knew he liked
best.

When the man came back he found the girl looking so much prettier
and fatter than when he had left her, that he insisted that they
should be married on the spot.  And the mother, who did not know
how to get rid of him, gave in.

The husband spent all his time in hunting, and the family had
never had so much meat before; but the man, who had seen for
himself how poor they were, noticed with amazement that they did
not seem to care about it, or to be hungry.  'They must get food
from somewhere,' he thought, and one morning, when he pretended
to be going out to hunt, he hid in a thicket to watch.  Very soon
they all left the house together, and walked to the other hut,
which the girl's husband saw for the first time, as it was hid in
a hollow.  He followed, and noticed that each one went up to the
redbreast, and shook him by the claw; and he then entered boldly
and shook the bird's claw too.  The whole party afterwards sat
down to dinner, after which they all returned to their own hut.

The next day the husband declared that he was very ill, and could
not eat anything; but this was only a presence so that he might
get what he wanted.  The family were all much distressed, and
begged him to tell them what food he fancied.

'Oh!  I could not eat any food,' he answered every time, and at
each answer his voice grew fainter and fainter, till they thought
he would die from weakness before their eyes.

'There must be some thing you could take, if you would only say
what it is,' implored his wife.

'No, nothing, nothing; except, perhaps--but of course that is
impossible!'

'No, I am sure it is not,' replied she; ' you shall have it, I
promise--only tell me what it is.'

'I think--but I could not ask you to do such a thing.  Leave me
alone, and let me die quietly.'

'You shall not die,' cried the girl, who was very fond of her
husband, for he did not beat her as most girls' husbands did. 
'Whatever it is, I will manage to get it for you.'

'Well, then, I think, if I had that--redbreast, nicely roasted, I
could eat a little bit of his wing!'

The wife started back in horror at such a request; but the man
turned his face to the wall, and took no notice, as he thought it
was better to leave her to herself for a little.

Weeping and wringing her hands, the girl went down to her mother. 
The brothers were very angry when they heard the story, and
declared that, if any one were to die, it certainly should not be
the robin.  But all that night the man seemed getting weaker and
weaker, and at last, quite early, the wife crept out, and
stealing to the hut, killed the bird, and brought him home to her
husband.

Just as she was going to cook it her two brothers came in.  They
cried out in horror at the sight, and, rushing out of the hut,
declared they would never see her any more.  And the poor girl,
with a heavy heart, took the body of the redbreast up to her
husband.

But directly she entered the room the man told her that he felt a
great deal better, and that he would rather have a piece of
bear's flesh, well boiled, than any bird, however tender.  His
wife felt very miserable to think that their beloved redbreast
had been sacrificed for nothing, and begged him to try a little
bit.

'You felt so sure that it would do you good before,' said she,
'that I can't help thinking it would quite cure you now.'  But
the man only flew into a rage, and flung the bird out of the
window.  Then he got up and went out.

Now all this while the ball had been rolling, rolling, rolling to
the old grandmother's hut on the other side of the world, and
directly it rolled into her hut she knew that her grandson must
be dead.  Without wasting any time she took a fox skin and tied
it round her forehead, and fastened another round her waist, as
witches always do when they leave their own homes.  When she was
ready she said to the ball: ' Go back the way you came, and lead
me to my grandson.'  And the ball started with the old woman
following.

It was a long journey, even for a witch, but, like other things,
it ended at last; and the old woman stood before the platform of
stakes, where the body of Ball-Carrier lay.

'Wake up, my grandson, it is time to go home,' the witch said. 
And Ball-Carrier stepped down oft the platform, and brought his
club and bow and arrows out of the hut, and set out, for the
other side of the world, behind the old woman.

When they reached the hut where Ball-Carrier had fasted so many
years ago, the old woman spoke for the first time since they had
started on their way.

'My grandson, did you ever manage to get that gold from the Bad
One?'

'Yes, grandmother, I got it.'

'Where is it?' she asked.

'Here, in my left arm-pit,' answered he.

So she picked up a knife and scraped away all the gold which had
stuck to his skin, and which had been sticking there ever since
he first stole it.  After she had finished she asked again:

'My grandson, did you manage to get that bridge from the Bad
One?'

'Yes, grandmother, I got that too,' answered he.

'Where is it?' she asked, and Ball-Carrier lifted his right arm,
and pointed to his arm-pit.

'Here is the bridge, grandmother,' said he.

Then the witch did something that nobody in the world could have
guessed that she would do.  First, she took the gold and said to
Ball-carrier:

'My grandson, this gold must be hidden in the earth, for if
people think they can get it when they choose, they will become
lazy and stupid.  But if we take it and bury it in different
parts of the world they will have to work for it if they want it,
and then will only find a little at a time.'  And as she spoke,
she pulled up one of the poles of the hut, and Ball-Carrier saw
that underneath was a deep, deep hole, which seemed to have no
bottom.  Down this hole she poured all the gold, and when it was
out of sight it ran about all over the world, where people that
dig hard sometimes find it.  And after that was done she put the
pole back again.

Next she lifted down a spade from a high shelf, where it had
grown quite rusty, and dug a very small hole on the opposite side
of the hut--very small, but very deep.

'Give me the bridge,' said she, ' for I am going to bury it here. 
If anyone was to get hold of it, and find that they could cross
rivers and seas without any trouble, they would never discover
how to cross them for themselves.  I am a witch, and if I had
chosen I could easily have cast my spells over the Bad One, and
have made him deliver them to you the first day you came into my
hut.  But then you would never have fasted, and never have
planned how to get what you wanted, and never have known the good
spirits, and would have been fat and idle to the end of your
days.  And now go; in that hut, which you can just see far away,
live your father and mother, who are old people now, and need a
son to hunt for them.  You have done what you were set to do, and
I need you no more.'

Then Ball-Carrier remembered his parents and went back to them.

[From Bureau of Ethnology.  'Indian Folklore.']




The Bunyip



Long, long ago, far, far away on the other side of the world,
some young men left the camp where they lived to get some food
for their wives and children.  The sun was hot, but they liked
heat, and as they went they ran races and tried who could hurl
his spear the farthest, or was cleverest in throwing a strange
weapon called a boomerang, which always returns to the thrower. 
They did not get on very fast at this rate, but presently they
reached a flat place that in time of flood was full of water, but
was now, in the height of summer, only a set of pools, each
surrounded with a fringe of plants, with bulrushes standing in
the inside of all.  In that country the people are fond of the
roots of bulrushes, which they think as good as onions, and one
of the young men said that they had better collect some of the
roots and carry them back to the camp.  It did not take them long
to weave the tops of the willows into a basket, and they were
just going to wade into the water and pull up the bulrush roots
when a youth suddenly called out: 'After all, why should we waste
our time in doing work that is only fit for women and children? 
Let them come and get the roots for themselves; but we will fish
for eels and anything else we can get.'

This delighted the rest of the party, and they all began to
arrange their fishing lines, made from the bark of the yellow
mimosa, and to search for bait for their hooks.  Most of them
used worms, but one, who had put a piece of raw meat for dinner
into his skin wallet, cut off a little bit and baited his line
with it, unseen by his companions.

For a long time they cast patiently, without receiving a single
bite; the sun had grown low in the sky, and it seemed as if they
would have to go home empty-handed, not even with a basket of
roots to show; when the youth, who had baited his hook with raw
meat, suddenly saw his line disappear under the water. 
Something, a very heavy fish he supposed, was pulling so hard
that he could hardly keep his feet, and for a few minutes it
seemed either as if he must let go or be dragged into the pool. 
He cried to his friends to help him, and at last, trembling with
fright at what they were going to see, they managed between them
to land on the bank a creature that was neither a calf nor a
seal, but something of both, with a long, broad tail.  They
looked at each other with horror, cold shivers running down their
spines; for though they had never beheld it, there was not a man
amongst them who did not know what it was-- the cub of the awful
Bunyip!

All of a sudden the silence was broken by a low wail, answered by
another from the other side of the pool, as the mother rose up
from her den and came towards them, rage flashing from her
horrible yellow eyes.  'Let it go! let it go!' whispered the
young men to each other; but the captor declared that he had